---
author: 'Marit J. MacArthur, Georgia Zellou, and Lee M. Miller'
date: '04.18.18'
shortauthor: 'Marit J. MacArthur et al.'
shorttitle: Beyond Poet Voice
title: |
    Beyond Poet Voice: Sampling the (Non-) Performance Styles of 100
    American Poets
---

::: {.entry .print-only}
::: {#post-1392 .post-1392 .post .type-post .status-publish .format-standard .has-post-thumbnail .hentry .category-articles}
###### *Peer-Reviewed By: Jason Camlot & Anon. *

###### *Clusters: [Sound](http://culturalanalytics.org/2016/05/sound/) *

###### *Article DOI: [10.22148/16.022](http://doi.org/10.22148/16.022)*

###### *Dataverse DOI: [10.7910/DVN/FGNBHX](https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/FGNBHX)*

###### *PDF: [10.31235/osf.io/5vazx](https://dx.doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/5vazx)*

###### *Journal ISSN: 2371-4549*

###### *Cite: Marit J. MacArthur, Georgia Zellou, and Lee M. Miller, "Beyond Poet Voice: Sampling the (Non-) Performance Styles of 100 American Poets," Journal of Cultural Analytics. April 18, 2018. DOI: [10.31235/osf.io/5vazx](https://dx.doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/5vazx)*

** **

Literary readings provoke strong feelings, which feed intense critical
debates.[^1]And while recorded literary readings have long been
available for study, few scholars have applied to them the empirical
methods that the digital humanities and interdisciplinary sound studies
now offer.

At [the Naropa Institute in
1974](https://archive.org/details/Cage_interview_and_performance_Empty_words_August_1974_A002B),
John Cage nearly inspired a riot at a reading of "Empty Words," a text
drawn from Henry David Thoreau's *Walden*. He read paragraphs from it,
then lone sentences, then words, then syllables and letters, with long
pauses in between. He recalled:

> After twenty minutes, an uproar began in the audience, and it was so
> intense, and so violent, that the thought entered my mind that the
> whole activity was not only useless, but that it was destructive. I
> was destroying something for them, and they were destroying something
> for me...
>
> It divided the audience, and at one point, a group of people came to
> protect me. Things were thrown, people came up on stage to perform,
> and it was generally an upsetting situation.[^2]

We can well imagine what upset half the audience so
much[---]{.emdash}the long intervals of silence, which audibly break the
frame of performance, and the threat of non-sense, which literary
culture has thoroughly metabolized by now, after Gertrude Stein, Cage
and L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E poetry. And the other half, those who protected
Cage, who valued what he was doing[---]{.emdash}what were they thinking?
To some degree, they clearly accepted the Zen-minded Cage's refusal to
entertain with more or less continuous, animated speech, in an effort to
encourage introspection, perhaps a meditative state. They were,
presumably, open to the "performance of nonperformance" as a concept and
a practice.

That is the phrase used by Raphael Allison, in 2014, to describe a 1963
reading by John Ashbery.[^3] Lesley Wheeler uses similar language to
characterize contemporary academic poetry reading styles, circa 2006.
After attending an exhausting number of readings at the Associated
Writing Programs (AWP) conference that year, she concluded that, as a
rule, "poets perform the fact that they are not performers.... \[They do
not\] display emotions ... but instead tend . . . to manifest
intellectual detachment, if not in the poem's words then through
carefully neutral delivery"[^4]. And in 2016, Christopher Grobe argued
that "What unites ... today's writers and performers ... is their
refusal to adapt literary content into dramatic form."[^5]

The alleged refusal of contemporary writers to *perform* poetry and
fiction may be reinforced by the likes of *Poets & Writers*, which
distinguishes between "poet" and "performance poet" in its funding
guidelines for [Readings and Workshops
grants](https://www.pw.org/funding/funding_readingsworkshops), and by
the National Endowment for the Arts-sponsored poetry recital competition
founded in 2005, Poetry Out Loud (for which MacArthur served as a judge
at California's state finals in 2017). The criterion for ["Dramatic
Appropriateness"](http://www.poetryoutloud.org/uploads/documents/Criteria.pdf)
includes the following advice:

::: {#attachment_1434 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Macarthur_fig1.png)

Figure 1. Dramatic Appropriateness, Poetry Out Loud.
:::

While the guideline against monotone is clear enough, what constitutes
"unnecessary emoting" depends both on the poem's content and on received
ideas, or cultural norms, about the regulation of affect. The safest
approach, for an aspiring student competitor, would be to err on the
side of unemotional. Though Poetry Out Loud does not use the term
"neutral," that seems close to what it wants. The Oxford English
Dictionary defines "neutral" as "Exciting no emotional response;
provoking no strong reaction; innocuous, inoffensive," as well as
"Displaying . . . no overt emotion; dispassionate, detached."[^6]

If Wheeler is correct that "neutral delivery" is a default style in
academic poetry reading today[---]{.emdash}and that is an open question,
defined more precisely below[---]{.emdash}it arose amid complaints from
poets as aesthetically incongruent as Charles Bernstein and Donald Hall.
In 1985, Hall opined about reading styles allegedly inspired by the Beat
and Confessional movements: \"the poet's performance substitutes an
actorly texture (pitch, volume, gestures; screaming, jumping, singing)
for *the real sound of words.*\"[^7] Bernstein sounded a similar note in
1998, approvingly citing Cage as an example of an "anti- expressivist"
reading style, which Bernstein also uses to characterize \"the common
dislike, among poets, of actors' readings of poems . . . \[when\] the
'acting' takes precedence over *letting the words speak for themselves*
(or worse, eloquence compromises, not to say eclipses, the ragged music
of the poem).\"[^8]

Poets and scholars often opine about poetry readings in broad terms,
characterizing the acoustic, non-verbal qualities of poetry performance
with familiar binaries, e.g. theatricality vs. sincerity, expressive vs.
neutral, affected vs. authentic, etc. As Grobe writes, "Essays on the
subject \[of poetry readings\] skew polemical, with a knack for inchoate
cliché and a tendency toward moral outrage"[^9] To be fair, most such
essays are popular, not academic[---]{.emdash}the think-pieces of their
day or ours[---]{.emdash}but they are worth our attention in terms of
reception studies. Not only that, but scholarly study of poetry readings
can feel uncomfortably close to popular polemics, sometimes informed by
a rich sense of literary history but fleshed out with anecdotal examples
that betray clear aesthetic-ideological preferences.

In recent years, a number of popular complaints have appeared about a
vocal cliché called Poet Voice. In Method Acting, it is a given that an
actor's speaking style should reflect the psychology and mood of a
character, rather than imposing a vocal cliché, a manner of speaking
that may sound dramatic or actorly yet does not arise from or represent
the distinctive nature of a particular character. Konstantin
Stanislawski defined a vocal cliché pejoratively in criticizing
"hack-actors" who "us\[e\] theatrical means of expression worked out
long ago . . . \[that\] often destroy the logical stress and even the
sense" of the words.[^10] The emergence of Poet Voice as a term is an
argument for the existence of at least one highly recognizable
performance style practiced by contemporary poets in the U.S., a style
that some listeners might call a neutral or anti-expressive style, and
that other listeners might find unduly dramatic. In 2011, "Poet Voice"
was defined in the [*Urban
Dictionary*](http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=dread%20poet%27s%20voice)
as \"A rhythmic style of reading poetry, akin to \[being\] on a boat in
choppy seas. The reader's voice goes up and down, up and down, and the
words of the \[poem\] are lost in the waves of pulsating intonation. *I
should have taken Dramamine to offset her dread poet's voice.*\" Vague
as it is, the existence of the term "Poet Voice" signifies a desire on
the part of diverse poetry audiences to pinpoint dominant trends in
performance styles that can feel highly conventional, even oppressive.

Many critics and poets love to hate Poet voice. What stands out, though,
in the most recent popular polemics about it[---]{.emdash}e.g. poet Rich
Smith's[^11] on [*City
Arts.com*](http://www.cityartsonline.com/articles/stop-using-poet-voice)
and poet Lisa Anne Basile's[^12] in the [*Huffington
Post*](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/lisa-marie-basile/poet-voice-flock-mentality_b_5830452.html)[---]{.emdash}is
that they go beyond claims about neutrality and drama, irony and
sincerity, to make explicit allegations that cultural elitism has
propagated Poet Voice. Smith takes sides in the neutral-vs.-dramatic
debate, recommending that poets learn from theatre,[^13] and
characterizes Poet Voice style as "stuffy" "precious" "self-serious"
"high-falutin" and "condescending." Basile, above all, wants to hear
more individuality, voices distinct from one another in their reading
styles. She goes further than Smith in claiming that homogenous MFA
programs perpetuate the reading style:

> It is as if almost 90 percent of the poetry community is trying to be
> the one percent, and we're not buying it.
>
> Poet Voice is often proliferated by MFA programs with overwhelmingly
> White, straight professors. The educated are taught to enunciate
> clearly and so they do.  And in their long-taught and long-learned
> efforts to rise above the ordinary people, they disseminate a viscous
> sound pattern....
>
> I have never met a friend for dinner who told me something beautiful
> or exciting or moving in such a way that her sentences ended at
> strange intervals. One would never end an important sentence in forced
> down-speak or up-speak. The sincerity would be lost.

Poet Voice is being deployed, then, in the cultural-political arguments
of the day, as an elitist imitative artifice, a vocal cliché that
inhibits individual expression.

Juliana Spahr's and Stephanie Young's 2015 piece, ["The Program Era and
the Mostly White
Room,"](https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/the-program-era-and-the-mainly-white-room/)
offers some support for Basile's point here. While they do not consider
poetry performance styles or Poet Voice, they persuasively establish,
with considerable research, that mainstream U.S. literary culture, and
indeed the rooms in which most poetry readings take place, are
persistently white and male-dominated. This is despite the fact that
those who study creative writing at universities are not, predominantly,
white men. Spahr and Young legitimize the question[---]{.emdash}as a
question worth pursuing in sound studies research[---]{.emdash}of
whether or how white male poets influence prevailing or conventional
performance styles.

What Basile describes as a "sincere," and implicitly unpretentious
alternative to Poet Voice, sounds likes the semantically motivated
patterns of conversational speech, or what linguists call natural
speech, which can be characterized by irregular patterns in terms of
pitch, timing and rhythm. In some sense, Poet Voice might designate a
performative style that signifies membership in an elite group of highly
successful poets, while a conversational manner might signify an
anti-performative, naturalistic poetry-reading voice of the less lauded.
Basile's efforts to characterize alternatives to Poet Voice, however,
suggest how slippery the concepts of expressive or performative are, as
empirical descriptions of a reading or speaking style.

In a 2016 article, MacArthur explored the origins of Poet Voice in
secular performance and religious ritual and oratory, and sampled the
intonation patterns of eight poets, four of whom seemed to use Poet
Voice[---]{.emdash}Natasha Trethewey, Louise Gluck, Juliana Spahr, and
Michael Ryan[---]{.emdash}and three of whom seemed to use comparatively
expressive styles[---]{.emdash}Sylvia Plath, Frank Bidart, Kenneth
Goldsmith[---]{.emdash}as well as recordings of Allen Ginsberg and
Martin Luther King, Jr. MacArthur also offered a somewhat more precise
definition of Poet Voice, under the term "monotonous incantation": "(1)
the repetition of a falling cadence within a narrow range of pitch; (2)
a flattened affect that suppresses idiosyncratic expression of subject
matter in favor of a restrained, earnest tone; and (3) the subordination
of conventional intonation patterns dictated by syntax, and of the
poetic effects of line length and line breaks, to the prevailing cadence
and a slow, steady pace."
[Here](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/monument-audio-only) is an
example of Trethewey, a poet commonly linked with Poet Voice, reading on
the Academy of American Poets website. Some listeners might call this
voice neutral, others might call it expressive.

In *Bodies on the Line: Performance and the Sixties Poetry Reading*
(2014), one of the most prominent recent book-length studies of poetry
readings, Raphael Allison does not address Poet Voice, but he makes
similar broad distinctions between contemporary reading styles. However,
he argues contra Wheeler[---]{.emdash}unless performance trends have
changed markedly between 2006 and 2014, which is
possible[---]{.emdash}that a more expressive style "has won out," within
the academy and beyond. He proposes the terms "humanist" and "skeptical"
to characterize somewhat distinct poetry performance styles:

> the *humanist* strain \[is\] the legacy of a style of 1960s poetry
> reading ... mainstreamed through the Beats and their imitators. It's
> characterized by what at first glance looks like faith in the power of
> "presence" .... its belief in the possibilities of aesthetic or
> personal coherence, and the power of poems to enact themselves and all
> their incongruous energies fully, faithfully, and at once.... \[this
> style\] is arguably what many mainstream poetry readings *subsist* on
> today[---]{.emdash}what crowds or (largish) groups come to witness,
> what performers typically proffer.
>
> The *skeptical* strain ... is what this book is really about. If
> humanist reading has won out, it can't eclipse its counterforce, a
> kind of reading characterized by what at first glance looks like a
> lively, ludic resistance to pieties of humanism[---]{.emdash}a sense
> of openness and possibility of meaning, lack of stability or
> consistency, and ironic detachment... Neither humanist nor skeptical
> styles of reading exist independently or with full coherence; rather,
> such terms are useful, though somewhat abstract, pegs for pinning to
> the wall tendencies, conditions of reading, emphases, and accents.
> This book argues that the dialectic between humanism and
> skepticism[---]{.emdash}skeptical humanism?[---]{.emdash}is *audible*
> in poetry reading from major figures from the postwar era in a variety
> of ways \[our italics\].[^14]

Allison's dialectic introduces a new set of binaries, behind which stand
old binaries. For "skeptical," we read neutral / anti-expressive /
ironic, linked to experimental poetry, especially the L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E
school and, for Allison, John Ashbery and his alleged "performance of
nonperformance"; for "humanist," here associated with the Beats and
their imitators, we read expressive / dramatic / sincere, and for
Allison, especially Allen Ginsberg. These binary terms certainly capture
something of poets' and critics underlying aesthetic and philosophical
commitments, which might well influence their performance
styles[---]{.emdash}but how? While the flourishing scenes of
contemporary American poetry, inside and outside the academy, offer
dizzying variety and diversity, it would be difficult to overstate the
importance of Ashbery and, by indirect association, L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E
poetry, as both experimental influences on many poets and favorite
antagonists of others. (This is one reason it makes sense to compare
recordings from PennSound, which is associated with L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E
poetry, with other poetry archives.) And it seems plausible that at
least some of those who have resisted Ashbery's influence would align
themselves with the Beats and/or Confessional poetry. So again, in
aesthetic-ideological terms, Allison's binary seems useful. To go back
to the Cage reading for a moment, we could probably sort his audience
into skeptical and humanist listeners. The skeptics were the ones
protecting Cage, the humanists were the ones throwing things.

Allison develops his argument with thick descriptions of recordings of
seven poets (Ashbery, Ginsberg, Robert Frost, Charles Olson, Gwendolyn
Brooks, William Carlos Williams, and Larry Eigner), and his preference
for the skeptical strain is clear. It is also, unavoidably, ideological
and aesthetic (including in the focus on Olson, Williams, and Eigner,
all poets beloved of the L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E school). Who wants to be a
naïf, to "subsist" on a poetics of presence that has been dismantled by
Derrida and company, rather than join a "lively, ludic resistance"?
Allison argues that even Ginsberg felt some ambivalence about the
humanist style he allegedly embodied much of the time, occasionally
displaying "a subterranean resistance to live reading."[^15]

The salient point here, however, is that Wheeler and Allison came to
seemingly opposite conclusions about dominant trends in poetry
performance styles. Has their listening experience exposed them to very
different groups of poets? This is possible. Or would Wheeler hear a
poetry reading as "neutral" that Allison would call "humanist," and thus
more expressive? Or is the pendulum swinging back from neutral toward
dramatic again? And are there, quite possibly, more than two performance
styles or tendencies at issue here? Despite all the work inspired by
Bernstein's needful call, in *Close Listening: Poetry and the Performed
Word* (1998), to take the poetry reading seriously as an object of
study, it has proved remarkably difficult to escape the
oversimplification of binaries, such as neutral-expressive,
ironic-sincere, skeptical-humanist.

The poetry reading has, for decades, been an unavoidable aspect of the
professional poet's life. And the institutionalization of creative
writing, government sponsorship of the arts, access to audio and video
recording technologies, and the digitization of audio recordings, have
accelerated the number of poetry readings and provided scholars with
greater access to recordings of them. This situation presents profound
opportunities for sound studies research, which have been answered by
groundbreaking work.[^16] However, among poetry scholars, even those who
study poetry recordings, the methods of linguistics, and the
computational approaches of the digital humanities, are often missing in
the study of recorded poetry readings. Our research addresses that gap,
and also offers ways to test the rich intuitions of traditional poetry
scholarship about poetry reading styles and their evolution.

Of course, humanities scholars[---]{.emdash}not to say humanists in
Allison's sense[---]{.emdash}are adept at generating broadly persuasive
insights from a few choice examples. Allison's intuitions about the
aesthetic ideologies that do battle in performance styles may be
precisely correct, but the problem is in the generalized assertions from
this, about sound and voice[---]{.emdash}that *this* is what
contemporary poets do, *and* that it is audible. Strings of adjectives
are of limited value in explaining how poets use their voices in
distinct ways from one another when they read a poem, or how listeners'
expectations might influence what they hear. What would it mean for a
"skeptical" or "humanist" or "neutral" strain, tendency, emphasis, or
accent to be *audible*? That is, perceptible, of course, but also
discernible from other styles? What exactly would a poet with a strong
humanist or skeptical bent do with her voice? If we think we have some
answers to that question, can they be empirically tested in any way?
And, importantly, how might our aesthetic and ideological preferences
lead us to expect that the poets on our team will sound, for instance,
neutral, ironical or sincere? What does irony sound like? What does a
poetics of presence sound like? And what is going on in all that wiggle
room between ironic detachment and so-called presence? Can any of
Smith's and Basile's claims, about the qualities of Poet Voice and how
it has spread, be confirmed? And how does Poet Voice relate to Wheeler's
and Allison's arguments about neutral and expressive, skeptical and
humanist performance styles?

In this regard, Tanya Clement and Chris Mustazza have developed notions
of "distant listening" and "machine-aided close listening." Clement
defines "distant listening" as "The opportunity to investigate
significant patterns within the context of a system that can translate
'noise'...into patterns, within a hermeneutic framework that allows for
different ways of making meaning with sound, opens spaces for
interpretation," and she extends her sense of it as the attempt to
analyze large audio archives, using supervised machine learning to
discover patterns at a scale that an individual human listener could
not.[^17]

This research project has allowed both kinds of insights, in part
because 100 sampled recordings lies in between the scales of close and
distant listening. That is, although 100 recordings are a small number
to analyze, compared to truly large-scale digital humanities projects,
our analysis reveals patterns we did not anticipate, about the
performance styles of poets whose work none of us are deeply acquainted
with, about which we had formed no opinions. At the same time, this
project also confirmed some of our impressionistic intuitions about the
performances styles of poets we know well, and about poetry performance
versus conversational speech.

Until recently, it has been difficult to test whether persuasive
insights about performance styles match empirical data about recorded
performances. That is, indeed, a primary goal of this research project.
Specifically, we investigated four overarching questions: 1) What
differences in prosodic measures exist, in a very limited sample of
recorded poems as read by 100 poets, between conversational speech and
poetry reading? 2) What differences in prosodic measures exist among
different groups of poets? That is, if we can quantify less and more
Formal, less and more Conversational styles of reading, less and more
Expressive, and less and more Dramatic reading styles (see Twelve
Prosodic Measures below), how common are each of these, and are any them
associated with a particular generation, gender, sexual or racial/ethnic
identity, educational background, recording context, or archive? 3) Do
poets who might sort out, in aesthetic-ideological terms, into
"skeptical" and "humanist," use distinct performance styles? 4) And
finally, can we quantify Poet Voice more precisely, and if so, how
common is it in this sample of 100 poets? (Here we used Trethewey and
Glück as our models of Poet Voice.)

When we began this study, we thought that if we could sample, quantify
and analyze the vocal performance styles of 100 American poets, we might
demonstrate and explore the prosodic features that critics and poets are
responding to. The qualitative and quantitative methods of linguistics,
augmented by statistical analysis and basic insights about the
neuroscience of speech perception, helped us test and refine such
judgments, pose new questions, and offer empirical alternatives to
complement impressionistic approaches to poetry performance. A basic
understanding of the linguistics and neuroscience of speech perception,
which are unfamiliar to many scholars who study poetry recordings, is
necessary to understand the methods, motivations and conclusions of our
research.

 

**The Linguistics and Neuroscience of Speech Perception and Prosody** {#the-linguistics-and-neuroscience-of-speech-perception-and-prosody style="text-align: center;"}
=====================================================================

When we listen to a poem read out loud, the tone of voice obviously
affects our interpretation of the words, and our perceptions of the
poet. In research on the perception of tone of voice, Jody Kreiman and
Diana Sidtis (2011) write that "studies ... support the idea that
listeners normally expect semantic and intonational meanings to be
concordant"[^18] They elaborate:

> Some authors ...  have claimed that normal adults usually believe the
> tone of voice rather than the words. Experimental studies suggest that
> ... this ... depends on how large the discrepancy is between the
> emotional and the linguistic meaning and how context is guiding the
> listener's perceptions. For example, the contrast in "I feel just
> fine" spoken in a tense, tentative tone might be politely ignored,
> while, "I'm not angry" spoken in "hot anger" would not. Extreme
> discrepancies between the semantics and the emotional prosody stand
> out as anomalous ... We notice when inconsistencies (which are the
> basis of verbal irony and sarcasm) occur, and often these incidents
> incite perplexity, fear, or humor.... \[T\]he fundamental frequency of
> the human voice \[pitch\] ... heads the list of important cues for
> emotional meanings.[^19]

Poetry performance is full of such anomalies, in which the tone of voice
contrasts with the affective content or mood of a poem. This occurs, for
instance, when a poem with hilarious content is delivered with flat
intonation, deadpan[---]{.emdash}to be more precise, when a very narrow
pitch range is used, approaching monotone (the monotone delivery of
comic [Steven Wright](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iVjVt98iHkQ) would
be an apt example of this). Criticism and analysis of poetry performance
styles are often motivated by perceived discrepancies between a poet's
vocal performance style, on the one hand, and the audience's
preconceptions about the content and form of a poem, and their
expectations for an appropriate or normative poetry reading style. It is
all too common to like a poem on the page and be disappointed by its
performance, and vice versa.

In linguistics, prosody refers broadly to acoustic qualities of speech
such as pitch (rate of vocal fold vibration, termed the fundamental
frequency), [^20] loudness, and rhythm, timing and speaking rate.
Intonation patterns[---]{.emdash}the rise and fall of the voice,
measured as pitch[---]{.emdash}as well as speech stress, speaking rate
and rhythm, interest poets a great deal. The poetics of Robert Frost,
for one, hinge on "tone of meaning ... without the words" ("Never Again
Would Bird's Song Be the Same"). When we listen to a poetry reading, or
a political speech, radio podcast, sermon, lecture, dramatic monologue,
stand-up comedy[---]{.emdash}when we listen to any string of
utterances[---]{.emdash}we constantly, half-consciously assess how well
the speaker captures and keeps our attention and matches our auditory
expectations. To this assessment, the prosodic features of the speaker's
voice are central.

Linguistic research demonstrates that speakers vary their prosodic
patterns based on paralinguistic context, most notably in response to
different types of interlocutors. (We might recall here Basile's sense
that a dinner conversation in Poet Voice would sound insincere.) For
example, parents talking to their babies produce higher and wider pitch
ranges than they do when talking to another adult [^21] In a laboratory
setting, people speak more slowly and louder amid noisy
environments[---]{.emdash}this is known as the Lombard Effect [^22]
Martin Luther King, [in a recording of "Letter from a Birmingham
Jail,"](http://itre.cis.upenn.edu/~myl/languagelog/archives/004045.html.)
uses a much narrower pitch range and quite different intonation
patterns, compared to his "I Have a Dream" speech.[^23]

Just as speech production can vary tremendously according to
paralinguistic context, our listening history or experience deeply
influences speech perception[---]{.emdash}including of performative
speech, like poetry readings. Psychologists have noted how we carry a
sort of buffer of recent history, an implicit memory, such that specific
words (or words representing related concepts) repeated over time are
processed differently (faster). This is called "priming," and it fits
with the growing recognition that the brain is perhaps best described as
a tremendously complex statistical prediction machine. Of course,
prediction is especially important for language, which is necessarily
temporally structured and extended.[^24] The brain also automatically
maintains expectations about more complex patterns in timing or pitch,
holding more than one prediction at a time in memory.

When we attend a poetry reading, all of the other poetry readings we
have attended help form our expectations for that one, including the
prosodic patterns a poet will use. Even without paying attention, our
brains "know" within a fraction of a second (150 milliseconds) that an
acoustic prediction was violated; the same goes for violations of
semantic and syntactic predictions. When recorded via EEG
(electroencephalogram) or MEG (magnetoencephalogram), which measure
electrical activity in the brain, this is called a "mismatch negativity"
or MMN. And rhythm or strict temporal regularity, called isochrony-what
we might call strict adherence to a formal metrical pattern in a poem,
or the reading of a free verse poem in this manner-is one type of
pattern.

In one way[---]{.emdash}a deep way[---]{.emdash}we are programmed from
birth to test our expectations, in this case expectations of prosodic
patterns, seeking experiences[---]{.emdash}and perhaps poetry
readings[---]{.emdash}that are neither too predictable nor too
surprising. This phenomenon is known in cognitive neuroscience as the
"Goldilocks effect."[^25]Too little unpredictability bores us. Too much
confuses us and isn't rewarding. This compulsion to learn, to attend to
the reasonably unpredictable, is codified in the mathematics of
information theory, developed by Shannon and Weaver in the mid-20th
century, which shows that a totally predictable pattern is also a
totally uninformative one. So when we encounter patterns that repeat
over and over, both our subjective engagement as well as our neural
responses tend to wane-a process called habituation. This tendency may
account for audiences' frustration with the perceived regularity of Poet
Voice.

Linguists have also shown that the perception of sounds and words in
speech can vary based on multiple sociolinguistic factors related to the
paralinguistic context. For instance, the perceived gender of a speaker
can influence the linguistic interpretation of a word,[^26] as can the
speaker's perceived characteristics related to race, ethnicity, national
origin,[^27]regional background,[^28] sexual orientation,[^29] and
age.^[30](#footnote_29_1392 "K. Drager, “The Influence of Social Characteristics on Speech Perception.” Unpublished Master's Thesis. University of Canterbury, Christchurch, 2005."){#identifier_29_1392
.footnote-link
.footnote-identifier-link}[31](#footnote_30_1392 "For instance, our perception of foreign-accented speech changes rapidly as we hear a few sentences and calibrate our internal expectations, as shown by Clarke and Garret’s 2004 study “Rapid Adaptation to Foreign-accented English.” Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 116, vol. 6 (2004): 3647-58. Listening to someone whom a listener visually perceives as a “non-native speaker” can make speech sound not only more “accented”(see D.L. Rubin, “Nonlanguage Factors Affecting Undergraduates’ Judgments of Nonnative English-Speaking Teaching Assistants,” Research in Higher Education 33, no. 4 (1992): 155-68).—what we might call a subjective quality—but, as Molly Babel and Jamie Russell found in “Expectations and Speech Intelligibility,”  Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 137, vol. 5 (2015): 2823-2833, it can also trigger speech processing reactions that make the speech less intelligible to the listener making visual judgments regarding accented speech."){#identifier_30_1392
.footnote-link .footnote-identifier-link}^ While three elite white male
poets may read their poetry in a similar manner, it is quite possible
that the perception of these shared identity markers influences us to
actually hear such poets as sounding similar in performance style. Or if
we place ourselves in a particular aesthetic-ideological lineage of
poetry, we may be predisposed to enjoy the reading style of a poet in
that lineage, and to perceive that style as highly distinct from, the
reading style of a poet whose aesthetic-ideological orientations we do
not share.

If we listen to the first few minutes of Allen Ginsberg reading *Howl*
(here in the [KPFA 1956 recording at
PennSound](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Ginsberg/SFSU-1956/Ginsberg-Allen_05_Howl-I_SFSU_10-25-56.mp3)),
we perceive that he uses the same relatively monotone cadence over many
long lines. For many listeners, this repetition is probably
lulling[---]{.emdash}whether we perceive this as pleasant or
unpleasant[---]{.emdash}and we probably attend less to the semantics of
what he is saying than to that sonic pattern. At the same time, his
vocal pitch level is gradually rising, and that may help keep our
attention, as it suggests change or intensification in mood. As Robert
Hass put it in "Listening and Making," an essay on rhythm in free verse
in *Twentieth Century Pleasures* (2000), "Repetition makes us feel
secure and variation makes us feel free."[^30]But though we all share
this heuristic, we are still individuals. Having different brains with
different experiential histories means that we engage the world with
different statistical predictions.

This surely applies to Wheeler and Allison's opposing conclusions about
dominant performance styles in contemporary American poetry reading.
When we listen to a recorded poem or attend a poetry reading, what
counts as boring, comfortingly familiar, surprising or refreshing
depends on our internal models, our predictions, which are in turn based
on our previous experiences of listening to and reading poetry.
Monotonous or otherwise highly repetitive prosodic patterns in poetry
reading may comfort some listeners and bore others, while more
idiosyncratic prosodic patterns in poetry reading may annoy the former
and reward the latter.

When we listen to poets read, we are responding on a nonverbal level to
their prosodic patterns, and to paralinguistic, non-verbal elements and
contexts. We need to attend to these prosodic patterns and
paralinguistic, non-verbal elements and contexts if we want to offer
histories of poetry performance with much explanatory power. Certainly,
as Jennifer Stoever writes, "listening \[is\] an interpretive site where
racial difference is coded, produced, and policed."[^31] The same is
true of gender difference and many other identity markers and cultural
factors related to authority and authenticity.[^32] If it is remarkably
difficult to escape our stereotypical expectations and perceptions of
what a person's voice "should" sound like, that is partly because our
brain uses such expectations to make predictions about our sonic
experience. As well as refining our sense of our preferences in
performance styles, this study may begin to extend some of the insights
of language ideology research.[^33] At the least, our approach to
empirical analysis of poetry recordings should provide humanities
scholars with ways to refine our terms in describing performance styles,
and to test whether and how our own biases, aesthetic-ideological
preferences and listening histories may influence our perception of
poetry performance styles.

 

**Data and Methods** {#data-and-methods style="text-align: center;"}
====================

In choosing 100 American poets to sample for their performance styles,
we aimed for a variety of aesthetic and educational backgrounds, as well
as some ethnic, racial, class, and sexual diversity, with fifty poets
born before 1960, and fifty after 1960. The rationale here was to
include several generations of poets, e.g. those whose careers developed
amid influential midcentury and later movements[---]{.emdash}such as the
Beat, Black Arts and Black Mountain / Projectivist movements,
Confessional poetry, the New York School, and the L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E
School[---]{.emdash}as well as to sample poets who came of age in the
complex aftermath of those movements. The oldest poets sampled are
Barbara Guest (born in 1920), Robert Bly and Frank O'Hara (born in
1926), the youngest Cecilia Llompart and Jamaal May (born in 1982 and
1985, respectively). We included twenty poets who studied creative
writing at the elite Iowa Writers' Workshop at the University of Iowa,
and also aimed to include a balance of poets who did their graduate work
at both private and public universities. All of the poets included in
the study have published at least one book, and most of the older poets
have published many more; many of the poets have been highly recognized
by the literary establishment with various awards and prizes. For
example, ten have received MacArthur "Genius" Awards (John Ashbery,
Jorie Graham, Robert Hass, Terrance Hayes, Ann Lauterbach, Heather
McHugh, Adrienne Rich, Kay Ryan, Mark Strand, and Ellen Bryant Voigt)
and thirteen have received the Pulitzer Prize (John Ashbery, Rae
Armantrout, Rita Dove, Louise Glück, Jorie Graham, Yusef Komunyakaa, Ted
Kooser, Kay Ryan, Tracy K. Smith, Mark Strand, James Tate, Natasha
Trethewey, and Franz Wright).

Most of the recordings were found on the websites of PennSound,
Poets.org (the Academy of American Poets, often linked to SoundCloud),
and the Listening Booth at Harvard University's Woodberry Poetry
Room.[^34] PennSound, founded by Charles Bernstein at the University of
Pennsylvania, is the largest online archive of poetry audio in the
world, with more than 5,000 hours of audio by 564 poets. PennSound
represent a more experimental strain in American poetry, affiliated in
part with L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E poetry, while Poets.org and the Listening
Booth were taken to represent more mainstream academic poetry. A small
number of recordings were also accessed on the websites of the Poetry
Foundation, Wave Books (linked to SoundCloud), Slate and a few others.
Though there is some overlap in representation of poets among these
archives, PennSound includes a large number of poets who are not
presently found on the other sites, and Poets.org and the Listening
Booth include a large number of poets who are not found on PennSound.
Other researchers would doubtless choose a different group of 100
poets.[^35]

Whenever possible, we selected recordings of poems approximately one to
two minutes long, and analyzed the first 60 seconds. Though shorter
poems might be thought to be lyrics, we did not attempt to choose or
classify poems according to mood, topic, or form. Most of the recordings
were made no earlier than the 1990s, with the exception of Ginsberg,
O'Hara, Baraka and Ashbery; the most recent date from 2016. We took care
to sample recordings only once the poet actually began to read the poem;
introductory chitchat, which is frequently delivered with distinct
prosodic patterns, was not included or analyzed, though a comparative
analysis of poetry and non-poetry speech in poetry readings would
certainly be worth doing in the future.

Two caveats. First, this study does *not* undertake[---]{.emdash}beyond
distinguishing between studio and live recordings, and noting the source
online archives[---]{.emdash}to trace the provenance of the recordings
or the process of their digitization, sound editing, or original
recording format. Such processes may affect a recording's speed and
pitch. However, highly significant changes are more common with older
recordings that have been transferred a number of times (e.g., some
recordings of Orson Welles's radio plays, as Neil Verma has pointed out,
originated on transcription discs, and were transferred to vinyl to
magnetic tape to CD and finally MP3s). We would also note that most of
these recordings are not of commercial broadcast quality, and thus did
not go through extensive post-production editing. In choosing mostly
contemporary recordings to analyze, we aim to compare recordings created
in similar media formats[---]{.emdash}often originally MP3s, converted
to WAV files for our analysis[---]{.emdash}and to avoid some of the
challenges of media-archaeological work with older recordings, the sort
that Jason Camlot has performed in, for instance, "Historicist Audio
Forensics: The Archive of Voices as Repository of Material and
Conceptual Artefacts." While we hope in the future to apply our methods
of analysis to older recordings, from the Modernist era and earlier,
more research on their provenance and media transformations would first
be necessary.

Second, this study does *not* attempt to consider how much an individual
poet's performance style differs from poem to poem, over time and for
different audiences, or how their speech in interviews or introductory
remarks to poems might compare to their reading of poems. Clearly these
are questions worth investigating in further longitudinal research;
Kenneth Sherwood has done interesting work in this area. While the data
from our small sample is of some use in characterizing an individual
poet's performance style at a given point in their career, and in
formulating hypotheses for further study of individual poet's evolution
as a performer, it should not be taken as conclusive; it is *most*
useful as a representative sample of contemporary poetry reading styles
in practice, and perhaps, as culturally sanctioned and encouraged. Data
about an individual's poet's performance style is also, of course,
interesting in comparison to other poets and other types of performative
speech.

In analyzing the 100 samples, we categorized the poets in a number of
ways. Our purpose here was to test whether any aspects of identity,
background, aesthetic or academic affiliation or performance context or
medium might correlate, individually or in combination, with particular
performance styles. We considered generation (birth year), biological
sex,[^36] sexual orientation, race / ethnicity, educational background,
and recording context (studio recording versus live reading). Table 1
lists poets by name, birth year, and so on, including the title of the
poem sampled and the year and length of the recording, and Figures 2 and
3 show the breakdown of Male and Female Poets sampled by corpus. Table 1
also includes statistics about twelve prosodic measures for each poet,
explained below.

  Name                                                            SpeakerType   ID             Biological Sex   Education                           Education Type   Corpus                                         Race.Ethnicity     BY     YearRecording   Poem                                     Poem Link                                                                                                                                                                             Length      RecordingType
  --------------------------------------------------------------- ------------- -------------- ---------------- ----------------------------------- ---------------- ---------------------------------------------- ------------------ ------ --------------- ---------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------- ---------------
  01\_Guest ,Barbara                                              Poet          Heterosexual   F                Berkeley                            Public           Woodberry                                      Caucasian          1920   1983            "Red Lilies"                             ["Red Lillies"](http://hcl.harvard.edu/poetryroom/listeningbooth/poets/guest.cfm)                                                                                                     01-Jan-70   Reading
  02\_Rich, Adrienne                                              Poet          Other          F                Radcliffe                           Private          Woodberry                                      Jewish-American    1929   2002            "What Kinds of Times Are These"          ["What Kinds of Times Are These"](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/features/audio/detail/76042)                                                                                       01-Jan-70   Studio
  03\_Cortez, Jayne                                               Poet          Heterosexual   F                Compton Community College           Public           Hammer Museum/Youtube                          African-American   1934   2011            "Two Rape Cases in the 1980s"            ["Two Rape Cases in the 1980s"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ig4ItmFlKTg)                                                                                                          01-Jan-70   Reading
  04\_Sanchez, Sonia                                              Poet          Heterosexual   F                NYU/Hunter College                  Private          Def Poetry Jam                                 African-American   1934   2010            "Poem for Some Women"                    ["Poem for Some Women"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7X8gIrkUTh0)                                                                                                                  01-Jan-70   Reading
  05\_Lorde, Audre                                                Poet          Other          F                Hunter College                      Public           Audre Lorde: The Berlin Years (film)/Youtube   African-American   1934   1992            "1984"                                   ["1984"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ceXFKzO7gZQ)                                                                                                                                 01-Jan-70   Studio
  06\_Clifton, Lucille                                            Poet          Heterosexual   F                Howard University/SUNY Buffalo      Private          Academy                                        African-American   1936   2012            "Homage to My Hips"                      ["Homage to My Hips"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/homage-my-hips-audio-only)                                                                                                  01-Jan-70   Reading
  07\_Jordan, June                                                Poet          Other          F                Barnard                             Private          Academy                                        African-American   1936   1992            "Poem about Intelligence"                ["Poem about Intelligence"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/poem-about-intelligence-my-brothers-and-sisters-audio-only)                                                           01-Jan-70   Reading
  08\_Howe, Susan                                                 Poet          Heterosexual   F                Boston Museum School                Private          PennSound                                      Caucasian          1937   2008            "Stage Snow"                             ["Stage Snow"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Howe/1-26-08/Howe-Susan_3_Stage-Snow_Segue-Series_BPC_1-26-08.mp3)                                                       01-Jan-70   Reading
  09\_Hejinian,Lyn                                                Poet          Heterosexual   F                Harvard                             Private          PennSound                                      Caucasian          1941   2005            "The sea as it receives"                 ["The sea as it receives"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Hejinian/KWH-2005/Hejinian-Lyn_The-sea-as-it-receives_04_UPenn_2-21-05.mp3)                                  01-Jan-70   Reading
  10\_Derricote, Toi                                              Poet          Heterosexual   F                NYU/Wayne State                     Private          Penn State / Youtube                           African-American   1941   2011            "Mysteries of Pittsburgh"                ["Mysteries of Pittsburgh"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1DRCGykd3cE)                                                                                                              01-Jan-70   Reading
  11\_Lauterbach, Ann                                             Poet          Heterosexual   F                Columbia                            Private          PennSound                                      Caucasian          1942   2014            "Without Irony"                          ["Without Irony"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Lauterbach/Zinc_2014/Lauterbach-Ann_Zinc_2014_Without)                                                                01-Jan-70   Reading
  12\_Gluck, Louise                                               Poet          Heterosexual   F                Sarah Lawrence/Columbia             Private          Academy                                        Caucasian          1943   1992            "Wild Iris"                              ["Wild Iris"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/wild-iris-audio-only)                                                                                                               01-Jan-70   Reading
  13\_Voigt, Ellen Bryant                                         Poet          Heterosexual   F                Iowa                                Public           Bread Loaf                                     Caucasian          1943   2011            "Groundhog"                              ["Groundhog"](http://www.nereview.com/ellen-bryant-voigt-reads-larch/)                                                                                                                01-Jan-70   Reading
  14\_Ryan, Kay                                                   Poet          Other          F                UCLA                                Public           Academy                                        Caucasian          1945   2006            "Home to Roost"                          ["Home to Roost"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/home-roost)                                                                                                                     01-Jan-70   Reading
  15\_Bang, Mary Jo                                               Poet          Heterosexual   F                Columbia                            Private          Academy                                        Caucasian          1946   2004            "Catastrophe Theory III"                 ["Catastrophe Theory III"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/catastrophe-theory-iii)                                                                                                01-Jan-70   Studio
  16\_Coleman, Wanda                                              Poet          Heterosexual   F                CSU-Los Angeles                     Public           Youtube                                        African-American   1946   ?               "Wanda, Why Aren't You Dead?"            ["Wanda, Why Aren't You Dead?"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ALI-QlOU_ok)                                                                                                          01-Jan-70   ?
  17\_Armantrout, Rae                                             Poet          Heterosexual   F                UC Berkeley/San Francisco State     Public           PennSound                                      Caucasian          1947   1998            "Heart of It"                            ["Heart of It"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Armantrout/Segue-98/Armantrout-Rae_16_Heart-Of-It_Segue-Series_Double-Happiness_11-14-98.mp3)                           01-Jan-70   Reading
  18\_Berssenbrugge, Mei-mei                                      Poet          Heterosexual   F                Reed/Columbia                       Private          PennSound                                      Asian-American     1947   2006            "Health"                                 ["Health"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Berssenbrugge/WPS1/Berssenbrugge-Mei-mei_02_Health_WPS1_NY_4-28-06.mp3)                                                      01-Jan-70   Reading
  19\_McHugh, Heather                                             Poet          Heterosexual   F                U of Denver, Harvard                Private          Academy                                        Caucasian          1948   1992            "What He Thought"                        ["What He Thought"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/what-he-thought)                                                                                                              01-Jan-70   Reading
  20\_Myles, Eileen                                               Poet          Other          F                UMassBoston                         Public           PennSound                                      Caucasian          1949   1998            "Voluminous"                             ["Voluminous"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Myles/1-17-98/Myles-Eileen_12_Voluminous_Segue-Series_Ear-Inn_1-17-98.mp3)                                               01-Jan-70   Reading
  21\_Graham, Jorie                                               Poet          Heterosexual   F                Iowa                                Public           PennSound                                      Caucasian          1950   1998            "The Spectators"                         ["The Spectators"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Graham-Jorie/Graham-Jorie_07_The-Spectators_UPenn_10-16-98.mp3)                                                      01-Jan-70   Reading
  22\_Dove, Rita                                                  Poet          Heterosexual   F                Iowa                                Public           Academy                                        African-American   1952   2011            "Reunion 2005"                           ["Reunion 2005"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/reunion-2005-audio-only)                                                                                                         01-Jan-70   Reading
  23\_Mullen, Harryette                                           Poet          Other          F                UC Santa Cruz, UT Austin            Public           Academy                                        African-American   1953   2001            "Present Tense"                          ["Present Tense"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/present-tense-audio-only)                                                                                                       01-Jan-70   Reading
  24\_Addonizio, Kim                                              Poet          Heterosexual   F                San Francisco State                 Public           Academy                                        Caucasian          1954   2000            "What Do Women Want"                     ["What Do Women Want"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/what-do-women-want)                                                                                                        01-Jan-70   Studio
  25\_Chin, Marilyn                                               Poet          Unknown        F                Iowa                                Public           Poems Out Loud                                 Asian-American     1955   2002            "Blues on Yellow"                        ["Blues on Yellow"](http://poemsoutloud.net/audio/archive/marilyn_chin_reads_blues_on_yellow/)                                                                                                    Reading
  26\_Alexander, Elizabeth                                        Poet          Heterosexual   F                U of Pennsylvania                   Private          Academy                                        African-American   1962   2015            "Autumn Passage"                         ["Autumn Passage"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/autumn-passage)                                                                                                                01-Jan-70   Reading
  27\_Rankine, Claudia                                            Poet          Heterosexual   F                Columbia                            Private          PennSound                                      African-American   1963   2011            "Don't Let Me Be Lonely Part 2"          ["Don't Let Me Be Lonely Part 2"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Rankine/Rankine-Claudia_Dont-Let-Me-Be-Lonely-part2_wkcr_5-17-2002.mp3)                               01-Jan-70   Reading
  28\_Doran, Geri                                                 Poet          Unknown        F                Florida/Stanford                    Private          Woodberry                                      Caucasian          1966   2005            "Retrospective"                          ["Retrospective"](http://hcl.harvard.edu/poetryroom/listeningbooth/poets/doran.cfm)                                                                                                   01-Jan-70   Reading
  29\_Trethewey, Natasha                                          Poet          Heterosexual   F                Hollins                             Private          Academy                                        African-American   1966   2007            "Monument"                               ["Monument"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/monument-audio-only)                                                                                                                 01-Jan-70   Reading
  30\_McLane, Maureen                                             Poet          Other          F                Harvard, Chicago                    Private          Poetry Foundation                              Caucasian          1967   2013            "One Canoe"                              ["One Canoe"](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/features/audio/detail/76842)                                                                                                           01-Jan-70   Studio
  31\_Wolff, Rebecca                                              Poet          Heterosexual   F                Iowa                                Public           Poems Out Loud                                 Caucasian          1967   2009            "Breeder Sonnet"                         ["Breeder Sonnet"](http://poemsoutloud.net/audio/archive/rebecca_wolff_reads_breeder_sonnet/)                                                                                         01-Jan-70   Reading
  32\_Klink, Joanna                                               Poet          Heterosexual   F                Iowa                                Public           Academy                                        Caucasian          1969   2016            "On Falling (Blue Spruce)"               ["On Falling (Blue Spruce)"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/falling-blue-spruce)                                                                                                 01-Jan-70   Studio
  33\_Kocot, Noelle                                               Poet          Heterosexual   F                ?                                   ?                Woodberry                                      Caucasian          1969   2009            "In the Barn with Crayons"               ["In the Barn with Crayons"](http://hcl.harvard.edu/poetryroom/listeningbooth/poets/kocot.cfm)                                                                                        01-Jan-70   Reading
  34\_Mlinko, Ange                                                Poet          Heterosexual   F                Brown                               Private          PennSound                                      Caucasian          1969   2001            "Music"                                  ["Music"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/groups/Line-Reading-Series/6-26-01_Mlinko/Mlinko-Ange_07_Music_Line-Reading_6-26-01.mp3)                                              01-Jan-70   Reading
  35\_Spahr, Juliana                                              Poet          Heterosexual   F                SUNY Buffalo                        Public           PennSound                                      Caucasian          1969   2001            "We Arrived"                             ["We Arrived"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Spahr/Spahr-Juliana_03_We-Arrived_Buffalo_11-14-01.mp3)                                                                  01-Jan-70   Reading
  36\_Shaughnessy, Brenda                                         Poet          Heterosexual   F                Columbia                            Private          Academy                                        Caucasian          1970   2016            "Last Sleep Best Sleep"                  ["Last Sleep Best Sleep"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/last-sleep-best-sleep)                                                                                                  01-Jan-70   Studio
  37\_Smith, Carmen GimŽnez                                       Poet          Heterosexual   F                Iowa                                Public           Academy                                        Latino American    1971   2016            "Default Message"                        ["Default Message"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/default-message)                                                                                                              01-Jan-70   Studio
  38\_Zucker, Rachel                                              Poet          Heterosexual   F                Iowa                                Public           SoundCloud                                     Caucasian          1971   2009            "The Day I Lost My D\_j\_ Vu"            ["The Day I Lost My D\_j\_ Vu"](https://soundcloud.com/wavepoetry/the-day-i-lost-my-deja-vu-by)                                                                                       01-Jan-70   Studio
  39\_Ortiz, Amalia                                               Poet          Heterosexual   F                U of Texas - Rio Grande Valley      Public           Def Jam Poetry/Youtube                         Latino-American    1971   2013            "Women of Juarez"                        ["Women of Juarez"](http://www.rememberoursisterseverywhere.com/video/amalia-ortiz-women-of-juarez-on-def-jam-poetry)                                                                 01-Jan-70   Reading
  40\_Smith, Tracey K.                                            Poet          Heterosexual   F                Columbia/Harvard                    Private          Page Meets Stage/Youtbe                        African-American   1972   2014            "One Man at a Time"                      ["One Man at a Time"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VqeQinmkUbM)                                                                                                                    01-Jan-70   Reading
  41\_Harvey, Matthea                                             Poet          Heterosexual   F                Harvard                             Private          Woodberry                                      Caucasian          1973   2010            "Our American Husbands"                  ["Our American Husbands"](http://hcl.harvard.edu/poetryroom/listeningbooth/poets/harvey.cfm)                                                                                          01-Jan-70   Reading
  42\_Lee, Karen An-hwei                                          Poet          Heterosexual   F                Brown, Berkeley                     Private          Academy                                        Asian-American     1973   2015            "Dear Millenium, Inadequate Witness"     ["Dear Millenium, Inadequate Witness"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/dear-millennium-inadequate-witness)                                                                        01-Jan-70   Studio
  43\_Manguso, Sarah                                              Poet          Heterosexual   F                Iowa                                Public           Woodberry                                      Caucasian          1974   2009            "Civic Pride"                            ["Civic Pride"](http://hcl.harvard.edu/poetryroom/listeningbooth/poets/manguso.cfm)                                                                                                   01-Jan-70   Reading
  44\_Peterson, Katie                                             Poet          Heterosexual   F                Harvard                             Private          Poetry Foundation                              Caucasian          1974   2013            "Enough"                                 ["Enough"](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/57277)                                                                                                       01-Jan-70   Studio
  45\_Hong, Cathy Park                                            Poet          Heterosexual   F                Iowa                                Public           Poetry Foundation                              Asian-American     1976   2010            "Ballad in A"                            ["Ballad in A"](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/poems/detail/53500)                                                                                                   01-Jan-70   Studio
  46\_Limon, Ada                                                  Poet          Heterosexual   F                NYU                                 Private          SoundCloud                                     Latino American    1976   2014            "What It Looks Like to Us"               ["What It Looks Like to Us"](https://soundcloud.com/adas-lim-n/what-it-looks-like-to-us-and)                                                                                          01-Jan-70   Studio
  47\_Lasky, Dorothy                                              Poet          Heterosexual   F                UMassAmherst                        Public           SoundCloud                                     Caucasian          1978   2009            "Tornado"                                ["Tornado"](https://soundcloud.com/wavepoetry/tornado-by-dorothea)                                                                                                                    01-Jan-70   Studio
  48\_Peterson, Trace                                             Poet          Other          F                CUNY                                Public           PBS                                            Caucasian          1978   2015            "After Before and After"                 ["After Before and After"](https://www.pbs.org/newshour/arts/poetry/poet-moves-create-first-class-transgender-poetry)                                                                 01-Jan-70   Studio
  49\_Che, Cathy Linh                                             Poet          Unknown        F                NYU                                 Private          Academy                                        Asian-American     1980   2016            "Los Angeles, Manila, \_\_ N\_ng"        ["Los Angeles, Manila, \_\_ N\_ng"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/los-angeles-manila-%C4%91%C3%A0-n%E1%BA%B5ng)                                                                 01-Jan-70   Studio
  50\_Llompart, Cecilia                                           Poet          Unknown        F                Virginia/Florida State              Public           Academy                                        Latino-American    1985   2016            "Omens"                                  ["Omens"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/omens)                                                                                                                                  01-Jan-70   Studio
  51\_O'Hara, Frank                                               Poet          Other          M                Harvard                             Private          ?                                              Caucasian          1926   1966            \"The Day Lady Died                      [\"The Day Lady Died](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nWiB2bmDa4I)                                                                                                                    01-Jan-70   Reading
  52\_Bly, Robert                                                 Poet          Heterosexual   M                Iowa                                Public           Academy                                        Caucasian          1926   2008            "The Greek Ships"                        ["The Greek Ships"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/greek-ships-audio-only)                                                                                                       01-Jan-70   Reading
  53\_Ashbery, John                                               Poet          Other          M                Columbia/Harvard                    Private          PennSound                                      Caucasian          1927   1963            \"They Dream Only of America             [\"They Dream Only of America](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Ashbery/Living-Theatre-1963/Ashbery-John_14_They-Dream-Only-Of-America_The-Living-Theatre_9-16-63.mp3)   01-Jan-70   Reading
  54\_Ginsberg, Allen                                             Poet          Other          M                Columbia/Berkeley                                    PennSound                                      Jewish-American    1927   1959            "In Back of the Real"                    ["In Back of the Real"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Ginsberg/Chicago-1959/Ginsberg-Allen_07_In-Back_Big-Table-Chicago-Reading_1959.mp3)                             01-Jan-70   Reading
  55\_Strand, Mark                                                Poet          Heterosexual   M                Iowa                                Private          Salmagundi/Youtube                             Caucasian          1934   2019            "Man and Camel"                          ["Man and Camel"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iG8tsuY1vRQ)                                                                                                                        01-Jan-70   Reading
  56\_Baraka, Amiri                                               Poet          Heterosexual   M                Columbia/Howard                     Private          PennSound                                      African-American   1934   1965            "Poem for Half-White College Students"   ["Poem for Half-White College Students"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Baraka/SFSU-1965/Baraka-Amiri_06_Poem-for-Half-White_SFSU_3-4-65.mp3)                          01-Jan-70   Reading
  57\_Bidart, Frank                                               Poet          Other          M                Harvard/UC Riverside                Private          Academy                                        Caucasian          1939   2008            \"An American in Hollywood               [\"An American in Hollywood](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/american-hollywood-audio-only)                                                                                       01-Jan-70   Reading
  58\_Kooser, Ted                                                 Poet          Heterosexual   M                Nebraska                            Public           SoundCloud                                     Caucasian          1939   1994            "Letter in October"                      ["Letter in October"](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/features/audio/detail/75667)                                                                                                   01-Jan-70   Studio
  59\_Pinsky, Robert                                              Poet          Heterosexual   M                Stanford                            Private          Academy                                        Jewish-American    1940   1992            "Street Music"                           ["Street Music"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/street-music-audio-only)                                                                                                         01-Jan-70   Studio
  60\_Hass, Robert                                                Poet          Heterosexual   M                Stanford                            Private          Academy                                        Caucasian          1941   2007            "First Things at the Last Minute"        ["First Things at the Last Minute"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/first-things-last-minute-audio-only)                                                                          01-Jan-70   Reading
  61\_Palmer, Michael                                             Poet          Heterosexual   M                Harvard                             Private          PennSound                                      Caucasian          1943   1990            "Song of the Round Man"                  ["Song of the Round Man"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Palmer/SUNY/Palmer-Michael_10_Song-Round-Man_SUNY_11-7-90.mp3)                                                01-Jan-70   Reading
  62\_Tate, James                                                 Poet          Heterosexual   M                Iowa                                Public           PennSound                                      Caucasian          1943   1998            "Never Again the Same"                   ["Never Again the Same"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Tate/KWH3-19-98/Tate-James_Never-Again-the-Same_Penn_3-19-98.mp3)                                              01-Jan-70   Reading
  63\_Koethe, John                                                Poet          Heterosexual   M                Harvard/Princeton                   Private          Academy                                        Caucasian          1945   2003            "Hackett Avenue"                         ["Hackett Avenue"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/hackett-avenue)                                                                                                                01-Jan-70   Studio
  64\_Ryan, Michael                                               Poet          Heterosexual   M                Iowa                                Private          Academy                                        Caucasian          1946   2004            "Outside"                                ["Outside"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/outside)                                                                                                                              01-Jan-70   Reading
  65\_Silliman, Ron                                               Poet          Heterosexual   M                San Francisco State / UC Berkeley   Public           PennSound                                      Caucasian          1946   1998            "One"                                    ["One"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Silliman/Philly-Talks-3/Silliman-Ron_02_Two_Excerpts-from-You_01-21-98_UPenn.mp3)                                               01-Jan-70   Reading
  66\_Mackey, Nathaniel                                           Poet          Heterosexual   M                Stanford/Princeton                  Private          PennSound                                      African-American   1947   1991            "Slipped Quandrant"                      ["Slipped Quandrant"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Mackey/7-91/Mackey-Nathaniel_3_Slipped-Quadrant_Naropa-Institute_Boulder_7-91.mp3)                                01-Jan-70   Reading
  67\_Komunyakaa, Yusef                                           Poet          Heterosexual   M                UC Irvine/Colorado State            Public           PennSound                                      African-American   1947   1998            "Lime"                                   ["Lime"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Komunyakaa/KWH3-16-98/Komunyakaa-Yusef_Lime_UPenn_March-16-1998.mp3)                                                           01-Jan-70   Reading
  68\_Herrera, Juan Felipe                                        Poet          Heterosexual   M                Iowa                                Public           NPR                                            Latino-American    1948   2017            "Poem by Poem"                           ["Poem by Poem"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4SmMH1OBKfE)                                                                                                                         01-Jan-70   Studio
  69\_Yau, John                                                   Poet          Heterosexual   M                Brooklyn College/Bard               Private          PennSound                                      Asian-American     1950   2000            "Life on a Loading Dock"                 ["Life on a Loading Dock"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Yau/Segue-2000/Yau-John_06_Life-on-a-Loading-Dock_Segue-DH_NY_2-12-00.mp3)                                   01-Jan-70   Reading
  70\_Rios, Alberto                                               Poet          Heterosexual   M                Arizona                             Public           Academy                                        Latino American    1952   2014            "Refugio's Hair"                         ["Refugio's Hair"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/refugios-hair)                                                                                                                 01-Jan-70   Reading
  71\_Doty, Mark                                                  Poet          Other          M                Goddard/Drake                       Private          Academy                                        Caucasian          1953   2006            "Paul's Tattoo"                          ["Paul's Tattoo"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/pauls-tattoo-audio-only)                                                                                                        01-Jan-70   Studio
  72\_Wright, Franz                                               Poet          Heterosexual   M                Oberlin                             Private          Woodberry                                      Caucasian          1953   2009            "To"                                     ["To"](http://hcl.harvard.edu/poetryroom/listeningbooth/poets/wright_franz.cfm)                                                                                                       01-Jan-70   Reading
  73\_Eady, Cornelius                                             Poet          Heterosexual   M                Empire State College                Public           PBS                                            African-American   1954   2015            "Emmett Till's Glass-Top Casket"         ["Emmett Till's Glass-Top Casket"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nm-HB4WZtIw)                                                                                                       01-Jan-70   Reading
  74\_Young, Dean                                                 Poet          Heterosexual   M                Indiana                             Public           Slate                                          Caucasian          1955   2013            "How to Glow"                            ["How to Glow"](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/poem/2013/01/_how_to_glow_by_dean_young.html)                                                                                      01-Jan-70   Studio
  75\_Gizzi, Peter                                                Poet          Heterosexual   M                Brown, SUNY Buffalo                                  PennSound                                      Caucasian          1959   2008            "Plain Song"                             ["Plain Song"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Gizzi-P/Close-Listening_3-08/Gizzi-Peter_05_Plain-Song_Close-Listening_3-17-08.mp3)                                      01-Jan-70   Reading
  76\_Phillips, Carl                                              Poet          Other          M                Boston University, Harvard          Private          Academy                                        African-American   1959   2016            "The Way One Animal Trusts Another"      ["The Way One Animal Trusts Another"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/way-one-animal-trusts-another)                                                                              01-Jan-70   Studio
  77\_Goldsmith, Kenneth                                          Poet          Heterosexual   M                Rhode Island School of Design       Private          PennSound                                      Jewish-American    1961   2006            "Traffic"                                ["Traffic"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Goldsmith/Traffic/Kenneth-Goldsmith_Traffic_WFMU_Sept-2006.mp3)                                                             01-Jan-70   Studio
  78\_Moten, Fred                                                 Poet          Heterosexual   M                Harvard, Berkeley                                    PennSound                                      African-American   1962   2010            "James Baldwin"                          ["James Baldwin"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Moten/2-24-10/Moten-Fred_06_james-baldwinUniversity-of-Kansas_2-24-10.mp3)                                            01-Jan-70   Reading
  79\_Clover, Joshua                                              Poet          Heterosexual   M                Iowa                                Public           Paris Lit Up/Youtube                           Caucasian          1962   2016            "I Want to Read at the White House"      ["I Want to Read at the White House"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g3BuoycL9uA)                                                                                                    01-Jan-70   Reading
  80\_Powell, D.A.                                                Poet          Other          M                Iowa                                Public           Academy                                        Caucasian          1963   2016            "A Long Night"                           ["A Long Night"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/long-night-full-moon)                                                                                                            01-Jan-70   Studio
  81\_Toscano, Rodrigo                                            Poet          Heterosexual   M                ?                                   Unknown          Woodberry                                      Latino-American    1964   2010            "Vibes"                                  ["Vibes"](http://hcl.harvard.edu/poetryroom/listeningbooth/poets/toscano.cfm)                                                                                                         01-Jan-70   Reading
  82\_Conrad, CA                                                  Poet          Other          M                ?                                   Unknown          PennSound                                      Caucasian          1966   2016            "Security cameras and flowers Ìã"        ["Security cameras and flowers Ìã"](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/CAConrad/KWH-1-27-2016/CAConrad_Security-cameras-and-flowers-dreaming_Wexler-Studio_1-27-16.mp3)    01-Jan-70   Reading
  83\_Manning, Maurice                                            Poet          Heterosexual   M                Alabama                             Public           Woodberry                                      Caucasian          1966   2009            "The Gone and the Going Away"            ["The Gone and the Going Away"](http://hcl.harvard.edu/poetryroom/listeningbooth/poets/manning.cfm)                                                                                   01-Jan-70   Reading
  84\_Zapruder, Matthew                                           Poet          Heterosexual   M                UMassAmherst                        Public           SoundCloud                                     Jewish-American    1967   2009            "When It's Sunny They Push the Button"   ["When It's Sunny They Push the Button"](https://soundcloud.com/wavepoetry/when-its-sunny-they-push-the)                                                                              01-Jan-70   Studio
  85\_Blanco, Richard                                             Poet          Other          M                Florida International               Private          SoundCloud                                     Latino American    1968   2012            "Maybe"                                  ["Maybe"](https://soundcloud.com/richard-blanco-poetry/audio-recording-maybe)                                                                                                         01-Jan-70   Studio
  86\_Young, Kevin                                                Poet          Heterosexual   M                Harvard                             Private          Museum of Modern Art/Youtube                   African-American   1970   2015            "Thataway"                               ["Thataway"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LsrLC98eF8Q)                                                                                                                             01-Jan-70   Studio
  87\_Rohrer, Matthew                                             Poet          Heterosexual   M                Iowa                                Public           Woodberry                                      Caucasian          1970   2010            "Statistics of Deadly Quarrels"          ["Statistics of Deadly Quarrels"](http://hcl.harvard.edu/poetryroom/listeningbooth/poets/rohrer.cfm)                                                                                  01-Jan-70   Reading
  88\_Beckman, Joshua                                             Poet          Heterosexual   M                Hampshire                           Private          Woodberry                                      Jewish-American    1971   2010            "My Pet Worm"                            ["My Pet Worm"](http://hcl.harvard.edu/poetryroom/listeningbooth/poets/beckman.cfm)                                                                                                   01-Jan-70   Reading
  89\_Hayes, Terrance                                             Poet          Heterosexual   M                Pittsburgh                          Public           Woodberry                                      African-American   1971   2010            "The Golden Shovel"                      ["The Golden Shovel"](http://hcl.harvard.edu/poetryroom/listeningbooth/poets/hayes.cfm)                                                                                               01-Jan-70   Reading
  90\_Burt, Stephen                                               Poet          Other          M                Yale                                Private          Woodberry                                      Jewish-American    1971   2012            "Butterfly with Parachute"               ["Butterfly with Parachute"](http://hcl.harvard.edu/poetryroom/listeningbooth/poets/burt.cfm)                                                                                         01-Jan-70   Reading
  91\_Yang, Jeffrey                                               Poet          Heterosexual   M                ?                                   Unknown          Woodberry                                      Asian-American     1974   2009            "Yennecott"                              ["Yennecott"](http://hcl.harvard.edu/poetryroom/listeningbooth/poets/yang.cfm)                                                                                                        01-Jan-70   Reading
  92\_Phillips, Rowan Ricardo                                     Poet          Heterosexual   M                Brown                               Private          Academy                                        African-American   1974   2015            "Death and the City"                     ["Death and the City"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/death-and-city)                                                                                                            01-Jan-70   Studio
  93\_Teare, Brian                                                Poet          Other          M                Indiana                             Public           SoundCloud                                     Caucasian          1974   2016            "There Is the Work.."                    ["There Is the Work.."](https://soundcloud.com/heonversant/there-is-the-work-in-our-minds-the-work-in-our-hands-and-the-work-as-a-result-brian-teare)                                 01-Jan-70   Reading
  94\_McCrae, Shane                                               Poet          Unknown        M                Iowa                                Public           RiverStyx/Youtube                              African-American   1975   2016            "Panopticon"                             ["Panopticon"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GnJwPIsQ2oo)                                                                                                                           01-Jan-70   Reading
  95\_Brown, Jericho                                              Poet          Other          M                Houston                             Private          CDMX015/Youtube                                African-American   1976   2015            "Again"                                  ["Again"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jUhH14st5Y4)                                                                                                                                01-Jan-70   Reading
  96\_Quesada, Ruben                                              Poet          Other          M                UC Riverside                        Public           Poetry LA/Youtube                              Latino-American    1976   2016            "After Oprah"                            ["After Oprah"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gmm8r3SEALk)                                                                                                                          01-Jan-70   Studio
  97\_Sigo, Cedar                                                 Poet          Other          M                Naropa                              Private          Poetry Foundation                              Native American    1978   2015            "L.A. Odyssey"                           ["L.A. Odyssey"](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/58018)                                                                                                 01-Jan-70   Studio
  98\_Fernandez, Robert                                           Poet          Unknown        M                Iowa                                Public           Poetry Foundation                              Latino-American    1980   2011            "Epithalamion"                           ["Epithalamion"](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/features/audio/detail/77229)                                                                                                        01-Jan-70   Studio
  99\_Betts, Reginald Dwayne                                      Poet          Heterosexual   M                Warren Wilson                       Private          Bread Loaf                                     African-American   1980   2011            "What We Know of Horses"                 ["What We Know of Horses"](http://www.nereview.com/2012/04/23/reginald-dwayne-betts-reads-his-work-at-bread-loaf/)                                                                    01-Jan-70   Reading
  100\_May, Jamaal                                                Poet          Heterosexual   M                Warren Wilson                       Private          Poetry Foundation                              African-American   1982   2016            "I Have This Way of Being"               ["I Have This Way of Being"](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/i-have-way-being)                                                                                                    01-Jan-70   Studio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
  in a one-minute excerpt from a monologue �'On Selfishness,�\"                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
  Louis CK 2013                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Table 1. 100 Poets, Background Information and Linked Recordings.

 

::: {#attachment_1437 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure2_PieChart_FemalePoetsCorpora.png)

Figure 2. Pie chart, female poets by archive.
:::

::: {#attachment_1438 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure3_PieChart_MalePoetsCorpora.png)

Figure 3. Pie chart, male poets, by archive.
:::

We also wanted to consider class, in part to test Basile's association
of Poet Voice with MFA programs with white, straight instructors and
with the upper classes, but it would be very difficult to characterize
the class of a poet without extensive biographical surveys. Some poets
clearly identify as working-class in their upbringing, such as Eileen
Myles. Others, like John Ashbery, might seem upper-class, as he attended
Harvard and Columbia, yet he grew up as the son of a farmer outside
Rochester, New York. Fred Moten grew up working-class, yet he went on to
attend Harvard and UC Berkeley. How do such changes of cultural milieu
and education affect a poet's voice, in performance and in conversation?
This, too, would be an interesting question for further research.

Given the difficulty assessing poets' class backgrounds, we chose
public/private graduate education as the basis for a very rough estimate
of class because private colleges and universities enroll middle-class
and affluent students at much higher rates than low-income students, who
attend public colleges and universities in larger numbers. We also
considered whether poets' graduate studies (often for MFA, but not
always) took place at the University of Iowa, whose graduates might be
thought to be particularly influential as creative writing instructors
and well-published poets who read widely. (Anecdotally, Poet Voice is
sometimes referred to as Iowa Voice, including by some Iowa graduates.)

Our approach to considering different categories related to identity and
background is informed by theories of intersectionality, which first
gained footing in feminist criticism and demands application to the
empirical study of performance styles. Specifically in our analysis, we
aimed to apply a concept called "intracategorical complexity," first
elaborated by Leslie McCall, which:

> look\[s\] within categories, especially those defined by multiple
> dimensions of difference (e.g. Black women), to expose the
> underexplored complexities inherent to these categories; while these
> approaches may undermine categorization or approach \[it\] obliquely,
> they do not necessarily reject the use of categories altogether.
> Instead, they insist\[s\] that categories contain more within-group
> differences than typically assumed, often explicitly demonstrating the
> inadequacy of standard categories to reflect lived experiences and
> social realities.[^37]

We are not directly concerned here with the history of discrimination or
activism, which intersectional theory and work often focus on, but such
identity categories certainly matter in the U.S. literary scene, and are
mobilized in debates about it. Again we refer to Spahr and Young's
findings that mainstream U.S. literary culture, including poetry
readings, are persistently white and male-dominated. Also relevant here
is the fact that literary scholars and poets, as much as anyone else,
can be influenced by broad identity categories[---]{.emdash}related to
aesthetics, ideology, race, ethnicity, class, gender, and so
on[---]{.emdash}in generalizing about how poets perform, in listening to
poets, and in forming expectations for how they should or will sound,
and in perceiving how they do sound (we refer to Smith and Basile as
examples here). For listeners and audiences, such identity perception
and expectation based on stereotyping is inevitable; our brains use it
to navigate the overwhelming complexities of daily life[---]{.emdash}and
of contemporary American poetry! And identity categories matter in terms
of poets' self-perception, of course, and in various ways they influence
the performance styles they adopt. But it is well to remind ourselves
that every category vastly reduces the complex variety of the things, or
poets, it groups together. This ought to be especially the case with the
performance of poetry, which, while it may or may not turn out to be as
conventional in performance style[---]{.emdash}in our research, defined
by prosodic patterns[---]{.emdash}as its critics believe, evolves among
a group of highly creative and idiosyncratic individuals.

In the context of poetry performance, we hypothesized that aesthetic
affiliation, gender, generation and/or educational background might
correlate with particular performance styles. However, we also wanted to
analyze the data with open minds, susceptible to unexpected insights and
negative results and, importantly, to the possibility that different
aspects of a poet's individuality, identity and training might combine
and manifest in her performance style in surprising ways. Such an
approach, again, assisted us in evaluating both popular assumptions,
like Smith's and Basile's, that class, race, ethnicity, and gender
overdetermine poetry reading styles, as well as scholarly insights and
arguments about normative poetry performance styles, including the
alleged tendency toward "neutral delivery" noted by Wheeler, Allison's
aesethetic-ideological oppositions and his sense that a "humanist" style
dominates, and the possible influence of Spahr and Young's "mainly white
rooms" on dominant performance styles.

Though we included a large number of non-white poets in our
representative sample of 100 American poets, we were somewhat limited in
this effort by the fact that, for most of the contemporary period, the
vast majority of poets who have found mainstream and/or experimental
success have been white, and thus the number of recordings readily
accessible in prominent online poetry archives are of white poets.
Figure 4 and 5 show the diversity of the 100 poets in terms of race /
ethnicity and sexual orientation.[^38]

::: {#attachment_1439 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure4_PieChart_ethnicity.png)

Figure 4. Pie chart, poets by ethnicity.
:::

::: {#attachment_1440 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure5_PieChart_sexuality.png)

Figure 5. Pie chart, poets by sexual orientation.
:::

As a basis for comparison with poetry reading styles, we chose a corpus
of conversational speech. Why conversation? First, though we recognize
that all speech is performative to some degree, influenced by context
and audience, conversational speech is less premeditated, and it is
often less formal than a poem in syntax and prosodic patterns. That
relative irregularity makes conversational speech an apt contrast with
reading styles that audiences often hear as highly regular in prosodic
patterns. Second, conversational speech also tends to be fast, and we
thought that poetry reading might be comparatively slower. Third, there
are also anecdotal suggestions that contemporary poetry performance
might be more conversational in style than earlier poetry [^39] or that
it should aspire to be more conversational in style.[^40]

While it might be ideal to compare recordings of poets reading poetry
with the same poets in conversation or interviews, it proved challenging
to find adequate recordings of some of the 100 poets doing anything
other than reading poems. Instead we used recordings of other
individuals speaking in a laboratory setting, drawn from the Buckeye
Corpus of Conversational Speech recorded at Ohio State University in
1999-2000. We sampled 60 seconds of continuous or nearly continuous
speech from 19 Buckeye speakers (of the 40 recorded), who were described
as "native central Ohio speakers" and "middle-class Caucasian" (3). The
speakers were all over 40 years of age at the time of recording, meaning
that all speakers were born before 1960.[^41] The Buckeye corpus was
collected in part to generate samples of "interspeaker variation" within
a relatively homogeneous group. Because the Buckeye Corpus samples a
specific region, class, age, and race of speaker, it might be more
precisely termed, native central Ohioan white middle-aged late twentieth
century conversational speech. In short hand, we will refer to it as
conversational speech.

In addition to the Buckeye conversational speakers, we included samples
of two other types of performative speech, including an excerpt from an
early version of Martin Luther King, Jr.'s delivering an early version
of his "I Have a Dream" speech in 1962 in Rocky Mount, North Carolina,
and an excerpt from Orson Welles's introduction to "The War of the
Worlds" from 1938. Religious-political oratory and radio drama are among
the many types of performative speech that are open to the prosodic
analysis we undertake here. We chose these two speakers because they are
well-known, and because they offer notable contrasts to norms in both
conversational speech and poetry reading.

In analyzing the recordings, we tracked both pitch and timing primarily
using TANDEM-STRAIGHT, a state-of-the-art open-source voice synthesis
program developed by Hideki Kawahara at Wakayama University in Japan,
with the Advanced Telecommunications Research Institute and the Auditory
Brain Project. (It can be downloaded and installed for free for academic
use.) TANDEM-STRAIGHT applies signal processing algorithms based on
human auditory processing to create a rich model of a recorded voice,
which can then be analyzed and manipulated.[^42] With TANDEM-STRAIGHT,
we also used a pitch-tracking
[algorithm](http://www.ee.columbia.edu/~dpwe/pubs/LeeEllis12-SAcC.pdf),
"Noise Robust Pitch Tracking by Subband Autocorrelation Classification,"
developed by Byung Suk Lee and Daniel P. W. Ellis at Columbia University
to work with precise accuracy on the noisy, low-quality vocal recordings
common in the audio archive of poetry readings. This algorithm measures
what human listeners perceive as vocal pitch, also called voicing (the
fundamental frequency, the vibration of the vocal cords, as measured in
hertz), every 10 milliseconds in a given recording. (Vowels are voiced
speech. Without getting too technical, unvoiced speech is typically
composed of consonants, like "t" and "s" and "p", the sound of which is
produced in the mouth, without vibrating the vocal cords. Unvoiced
speech does not register in human auditory perception as having pitch.)
To calculate words per minute, we used a powerful forced aligner called
Gentle that can create rough transcripts of speech recordings, and line
up a given transcript with that recording, word by word, delivering
precise timing information. Though it is simple enough to divide the
number of words by the length of a recording, Gentle was useful in
creating transcripts of poems (which we corrected as necessary), for the
purpose of this research, that are under copyright and/or are otherwise
unavailable as text.[^43]

Finally, we further analyzed the resulting data about pitch and timing,
in the 100 samples and the nineteen Buckeye recordings, in Matlab with a
script written by Miller. Specifically, we developed twelve prosodic
measures to reflect what we perceive as the salient features of pitch
and timing in poetry performance. How fast does a poet read? How often
does she pause? How long are her pauses? How regular or irregular is the
rhythm of her reading? How predictably or unpredictably does she pause?
How wide is her pitch range[---]{.emdash}that is, does she use a
relatively narrow pitch range, approaching monotone, or does she use a
relatively wider pitch range, to include a range of and/or shifts in
emotional state, argument or tone? How contrastive is her pitch?

Based on the data about the twelve prosodic measures, we propose four
stylistic tendencies that begin to characterize reading styles more
precisely than the binary of neutral vs. expressive. We would expect
poets who read in a more Formal style to have predictable rhythm and
speak relatively slowly, with fairly regular pauses. A more
Conversational poet would use less predictable rhythm and would speak
relatively fast, with a less regular pattern of pauses. Whether Formal
or Conversational in speaking rate and rhythm, a poet might also read in
more or less Expressive style[---]{.emdash}that is, she might use a wide
pitch range and highly contrastive pitch, or she might use a narrower
pitch range, little contrastive pitch. Finally, a poet might read in a
more or less Dramatic style[---]{.emdash}that is, she might use long,
unpredictable pauses (unpredictable because their timing would depend on
the idiosyncrasies of content rather than the conventions of poetic form
or syntax) to create suspense and/or tension, or she might use few long
pauses. The four tendencies might combine in different ways. Formal
would usually be opposed to Conversational, but we might describe a poet
as Formal-Expressive, Conversational-Expressive,
Formal-Expressive-Dramatic, Conversational-Expressive-Dramatic,
Formal-Inexpressive, or Conversational-Inexpressive. In aggregate, the
prosodic measures we have developed have not been applied to the
analysis of poetry recordings.[^44]To understand differences in prosodic
measures, and the range found in these 100 samples, readers are strongly
encouraged to listen to the hyperlinked examples below, which accompany
the descriptions "Twelve Prosodic Measures," and also to all of the
sampled poems, hyperlinked in Table 1.

 

**Twelve Prosodic Measures** {#twelve-prosodic-measures style="text-align: center;"}
----------------------------

1)         [Speaking rate calculated as words per minute, or
WPM.]{.underline} The transcript of the recording created by Gentle,
corrected when necessary, produced the number of words read, which was
divided by the length of the recording and normalized, if the recording
was longer or shorter than one minute, to reflect the speaking rate for
60 seconds. In these 100 samples, [June
Jordan](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/poem-about-intelligence-my-brothers-and-sisters-audio-only)
(193 WPM) and [Kenneth
Goldsmith](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Goldsmith/Traffic/Kenneth-Goldsmith_Traffic_WFMU_Sept-2006.mp3)
(195 WPM) read the fastest, suggesting a Conversational style, while
[Cecilia Llompart](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/omens) (88 WPM)
and [Rodrigo
Toscano](http://hcl.harvard.edu/poetryroom/listeningbooth/poets/toscano.cfm)
(79 WPM) read the slowest, suggesting a more Formal style. Poets
typically average around 134 WPM. The sampled recordings of Orson Welles
and [Martin Luther King, Jr.](http://kingsfirstdream.com/kfd/), are
close to that norm, at 143 and 144 WPM, respectively.

2)         [Average Pause Length]{.underline}, for pauses of at least
100, 250 and 500 milliseconds, normalized for recording length. Using
TANDEM-STRAIGHT, moments of pause were assigned whenever the speech
energy fell below a threshold (10 decibels below the 90% quantile of
energy across the entire recording-roughly, whenever the acoustic energy
was less than half as loud as fully articulated utterances). We do not
consider pauses less than 100ms because fully continuous speech also
naturally has such brief gaps in energy, nor do we consider pauses that
exceed 1,999 ms (that is, 2 seconds), because they are quite rare.
[Sonia Sanchez](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7X8gIrkUTh0) (.58 sec.)
and [Jericho Brown](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jUhH14st5Y4) (.62
sec.) have the shortest longer pauses, on the female and male sides,
respectively, while [Maureen
McLane](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/podcasts/76842/one-canoe) (1.34
sec.) and [Frank
Bidart](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/american-hollywood-audio-only)
(1.48 sec.) make the longest. We would expect more Dramatic and possibly
more Formal styles to exhibit longer pauses, while Conversational styles
would exhibit shorter pauses (Welles and
[King](http://kingsfirstdream.com/kfd/) have fairly short pauses,
between .33 and .4 seconds, close to the norm of .29 seconds, and .31
seconds for the female and male Buckeye speakers, respectively).

3)         [Average Pause Rate]{.underline} per second, for pauses of at
least 100, 250 and 500 ms. In these 100 samples, [Sonia
Sanchez](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7X8gIrkUTh0) (.03 per sec) and
[Kenneth
Goldsmith](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Goldsmith/Traffic/Kenneth-Goldsmith_Traffic_WFMU_Sept-2006.mp3)
(.02 per sec.) make long pauses less frequently (pauses greater than 500
ms), while [Juan Felipe
Herrera](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4SmMH1OBKfE) (.54 per sec) and
[Rebecca
Wolff](http://poemsoutloud.net/audio/archive/rebecca_wolff_reads_breeder_sonnet/)
(.39 per sec.) make them most frequently. Again, we would expect more
Dramatic and possibly more Formal styles to make frequent longer pauses,
while Conversational styles might pause often, but not for long. Female
and male Buckeye speakers both have a pause rate of about 1 per sec.
[King](http://kingsfirstdream.com/kfd/) has a pause rate of .85 per
sec., Welles of 1.13 per sec.

4)         [Rhythmic Complexity of Pauses]{.underline}[^45] (of at least
100 ms). [Juliana
Spahr](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Spahr/Spahr-Juliana_03_We-Arrived_Buffalo_11-14-01.mp3)
(3.23) and [Matthew
Rohrer](http://hcl.harvard.edu/poetryroom/listeningbooth/poets/rohrer.cfm)
(4.03) have the lowest rhythmic complexity of pauses, suggesting they
read in a more Formal style in terms of predictable rhythm of pauses,
while [Mei-Mei
Berssenbrugge](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Berssenbrugge/WPS1/Berssenbrugge-Mei-mei_02_Health_WPS1_NY_4-28-06.mp3)
(9.95) and [Dean
Young](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/poem/2013/01/_how_to_glow_by_dean_young.html)
(10.81) have the highest, suggesting that they read in a comparatively
Conversational style, with unpredictable rhythm of pauses. A low value
for this measure might also predict a Dramatic style, judging
tentatively from the value for our Dramatic example, [Frank
Bidart](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/american-hollywood-audio-only)
(4.74). The female Buckeye speakers have values of 7.63 and the males
7.21, while [King's](http://kingsfirstdream.com/kfd/) is 6.48 and Welles
is 8.34.

5)         [Rhythmic Complexity of Syllables]{.underline}. Here we
identified all long unvoiced periods, \> than 400 ms, and cropped or
shortened these to 400 ms. This focuses the rhythmic complexity measure
on rapid, syllabic-scale voiced-unvoiced patterns. For this measure,
[Juan Felipe Herrera](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4SmMH1OBKfE)
(6.59) and [Tracy K. Smith](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VqeQinmkUbM)
(9.75) have the lowest rhythmic complexity, while [Cathy Linh
Che](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/los-angeles-manila-da-nang)
(16.48) and [Kenneth
Goldsmith](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Goldsmith/Traffic/Kenneth-Goldsmith_Traffic_WFMU_Sept-2006.mp3)
(17.23) have the highest. As with Rhythmic Complexity of Pauses, higher
Rhythmic Complexity of Syllables likely indicates a Conversational
style, while lower indicates a more Formal style. Our example of a
Conversational-Dramatic poet, [Frank
Bidart](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/american-hollywood-audio-only),
has a value of 12.77. His is close to
[King's](http://kingsfirstdream.com/kfd/), at 13, while Welles' is 16.4.
The female Buckeye speakers have an average of 16, male Buckeye speakers
13.4.

6)         [Rhythmic Complexity of Phrases]{.underline}. Here we remove
unvoiced periods \< than 400 ms, as if smashing consecutive syllables
together. This focuses the rhythmic complexity measure on slower
voiced-unvoiced patterns, at the scale of the phrase rather than the
syllable. For this measure, [Jericho
Brown](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jUhH14st5Y4) (1.93) and [Sonia
Sanchez](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7X8gIrkUTh0) (.94) have the
lowest rhythmic complexity, while [Juan Felipe
Herrera](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4SmMH1OBKfE) (4.92) and [Audre
Lorde](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ceXFKzO7gZQ) (4.37) have the
highest. Our example of a Conversational-Dramatic poet, [Frank
Bidart](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/american-hollywood-audio-only),
has a value of 2.83. [King's](http://kingsfirstdream.com/kfd/) is 5.58
and Welles is 3.23. The average for female Buckeye speakers is 2.65 and
for males it is 2.89.

7)         [Average Pitch]{.underline} (mean f0, or fundamental
frequency, sampled every 10 milliseconds), of each voice in Hertz, which
is cycles per second[---]{.emdash}literally the number of times the
vocal cords vibrate per second. For this measure, [Jorie
Graham](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Graham-Jorie/Graham-Jorie_07_The-Spectators_UPenn_10-16-98.mp3)
(146 hz) and [Richard
Blanco](https://soundcloud.com/richard-blanco-poetry/audio-recording-maybe)
(81 hz) use the lowest average pitch, while [Lucille
Clifton](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/homage-my-hips-audio-only)
(281 hz) and [Alberto
Rios](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/refugios-hair) (152 hz) have
the highest. [King](http://kingsfirstdream.com/kfd/) exhibits fairly
high pitch, at 194 Hz, while Welles is fairly low, at 111 Hz.

8)         [Pitch Range]{.underline} in octaves (range of f0). For this
measure, [Natasha
Trethewey](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/monument-audio-only) (1
octave) and [Matthew
Zapruder](https://soundcloud.com/wavepoetry/when-its-sunny-they-push-the)
(.66 octaves) use the narrowest pitch range, while [Maureen
McLane](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/podcasts/76842/one-canoe) (2.75
octaves) and [CA
Conrad](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/CAConrad/KWH-1-27-2016/CAConrad_Security-cameras-and-flowers-dreaming_Wexler-Studio_1-27-16.mp3)
(2.5 octaves) use the widest. [King](http://kingsfirstdream.com/kfd/) is
close with a range of 2.5 octaves, while Welles uses a range of 1.33
octaves.

9)         [Pitch Speed]{.underline}, or speed of f0 in octaves per
second. This is simply a measure of how fast pitch is changing. While we
calculate this with attention to direction of pitch speed, or
velocity[---]{.emdash}that is, whether pitch is typically rising or
falling, which can indicate a questioning, leading, or tentative tone,
versus an authoritative, declarative or conclusive tone[---]{.emdash}we
remove the +/- sign to compare the absolute value of the pitch speed
among speakers.[^46] This is one of the most useful measures for
expressivity, in our view. For this measure, [Louise
Glück](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/wild-iris-audio-only) (.48
octaves) and [Brian
Teare](https://soundcloud.com/heonversant/there-is-the-work-in-our-minds-the-work-in-our-hands-and-the-work-as-a-result-brian-teare)
(.74 octaves) use the slowest pitch speed, while [Rae
Armantrout](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Armantrout/Segue-98/Armantrout-Rae_16_Heart-Of-It_Segue-Series_Double-Happiness_11-14-98.mp3)
(2.13 octaves) and [Jamaal
May](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/i-have-way-being) (1.62
octaves) use the fastest. [King's](http://kingsfirstdream.com/kfd/)
pitch speed is .94 and Welles's is 1.36.

10)       [Pitch Acceleration,]{.underline} or acceleration of f0 in
octaves per second squared. Acceleration is the rate of change of pitch
velocity, that is how rapidly the changes in pitch change, which we
perceive as the lilt of a voice. Again, while we calculate the rate of
change in speed with attention to direction[---]{.emdash}that is,
whether pitch change is typically curving upward or curving downward
[---]{.emdash}we compare pitch acceleration among speakers without
regard to direction. This is also a very useful measure for
expressivity. For this measure, [Louise
Glück](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/wild-iris-audio-only) (.54
octaves) and [Dean
Young](http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/poem/2013/01/_how_to_glow_by_dean_young.html)
(1.18 octaves) use the slowest pitch acceleration, while [Wanda
Coleman](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ALI-QlOU_ok) (2.28 octaves) and
[CA
Conrad](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/CAConrad/KWH-1-27-2016/CAConrad_Security-cameras-and-flowers-dreaming_Wexler-Studio_1-27-16.mp3)
(2.18 octaves) use the fastest.

11\) [Pitch Entropy,]{.underline} or entropy for f0, indicating the
predictability of pitch patterns. Entropy is an information theoretic
measure of predictability (or strictly speaking, its opposite -
unpredictability or disorder). Mathematically, if P(f) is the
probability that a given talker uses a particular pitch frequency f,
then entropy is given by the negative of the sum of all pitch
probabilities times the log (base 2) of those pitch probabilities
-�'P(f)\*log~2~P(f). In this case, entropy quantifies how uniformly a
speaker uses all possible pitches within +/-1 octave of their
mean[---]{.emdash}that is, how unpredictable the pitch is. Staying
narrowly close to the mean most of the time (even with high f0speed)
gives low entropy (highly predictable). Using all pitches with equal
probability gives high entropy (very unpredictable). For this measure,
[Claudia
Rankine](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Rankine/Rankine-Claudia_Dont-Let-Me-Be-Lonely-part2_wkcr_5-17-2002.mp3)
(2.36) and [Jeffrey
Yang](http://hcl.harvard.edu/poetryroom/listeningbooth/poets/yang.cfm)
(2.35) exhibit the lowest pitch entropy, while [Wanda
Coleman](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ALI-QlOU_ok) (4.25) and [CA
Conrad](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/CAConrad/KWH-1-27-2016/CAConrad_Security-cameras-and-flowers-dreaming_Wexler-Studio_1-27-16.mp3)
(4.09) exhibit the highest pitch entropy.

12\) [Dynamism]{.underline}. This is a composite measure, multiplying
average pitch speed by average pitch entropy, and adding the average of
syllabic and phrasal rhythmic complexity, with the terms weighted to
have equal influence (dynamism = (abs(f0speed) \* f0entropy) +
(complexitySyllables+complexityPhrases)\*.2195. This is a
measure-in-progress, an attempt to put on a number on how predictable or
repetitive a speaker's pitch, or intonation, and rhythmic patterns are.
For this measure, [Louise
Glück](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/wild-iris-audio-only) (4.6)
and [Allen
Ginsberg](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/Ginsberg/Chicago-1959/Ginsberg-Allen_07_In-Back_Big-Table-Chicago-Reading_1959.mp3)
(5.35) exhibit the lowest dynamism, while [Wanda
Coleman](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ALI-QlOU_ok) (12.69) and [CA
Conrad](https://media.sas.upenn.edu/pennsound/authors/CAConrad/KWH-1-27-2016/CAConrad_Security-cameras-and-flowers-dreaming_Wexler-Studio_1-27-16.mp3)
(10.31) exhibit the highest. Judging tentatively from our
Conversational-Dramatic example, [Frank
Bidart](https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/american-hollywood-audio-only)
(9.39), a relatively high value for Dynamism may also be associated with
a Dramatic style.

In order to confirm whether differences in acoustic and prosodic
variables between conversational speech and poetry readings, and between
different groups of poets, are reliable and meaningful, or statistically
significant, we performed a number of pairwise comparisons using
Wilcoxon sum rank test, a.k.a Mann Whitney U Test, and as well as
two-way Welch t-tests for larger groups. In what follows, we present and
discuss the statistically significant results. However, given that we
are sampling only a single recording of a single poem by each of these
100 poets from their entire careers, we discourage readers from drawing
conclusions about the performance style of an individual poet or,
indeed, about contemporary American performance trends. While this
research represents, as far as we know, the largest effort to date to
empirically analyze performance styles in poetry recordings, the dataset
is an extremely small sample. It is most usefully thought of as a sample
of contemporary American poetry reading styles in practice. Our results,
as well as the code we used in Matlab, with TANDEM-STRAIGHT and the
Ellis pitch-tracking algorithm, are available on Dataverse.

** **

**Results and Discussion** {#results-and-discussion style="text-align: center;"}
==========================

Overall, we see the most statistically significant differences between
the sampled female Buckeye conversational speakers and female poets, and
within the poets as a group, we see the most differences among subsets
of sampled female poets.

**Buckeye Conversational Speakers vs. Poets** {#buckeye-conversational-speakers-vs.-poets style="text-align: center;"}
---------------------------------------------

-   Poets use a narrower pitch range, slower speaking rate (WPM), and
    slightly longer pauses than the Buckeye conversational speakers.
-   Buckeye conversational speakers rarely use long pauses (just two of
    the sampled nineteen Buckeye speakers have pauses of 2 seconds or
    longer, or 10.5%, while 33 of the 100 poets do, so 33%)
-   Female poets and female Buckeye conversational speakers use a wider
    pitch range than males of both groups, but do not differ in other
    pitch measures that we associate with a more or less Expressive
    style.
-   Female poets use a slightly higher average pitch, and exhibit lower
    rhythmic complexity of pauses and syllables (or more consistent,
    predictable rhythm, as might be expected with reading formal poetry
    or a more Formal style) and lower dynamism (also indicating greater
    predictability, more formal poetry or a more Formal style), compared
    to the female Buckeye conversational speakers.
-   Overall, male poets differ less significantly from the male Buckeye
    conversational speakers than do the female poets from the female
    Buckeye conversational speakers.
-   Among male poets, we do not find significant differences among poets
    in terms of birth year.
-   As a group, female poets also use a slightly higher average pitch
    than the female conversational speakers, perhaps due to the
    performative context of a poetry reading or studio recording. Other
    factors could account for this difference[---]{.emdash}for instance,
    the inclusion of younger female poets, 25 of whom were born after
    1960, whereas all of the female Buckeye conversational speakers were
    born before 1960. Research has shown that women's voices tend to
    decrease in average pitch as they age.[^47]

::: {#attachment_1441 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure6_PitchRange_boxplot_all.png)

Figure 6. Pitch range, all.
:::

::: {#attachment_1442 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure7_PitchSpeed_boxplot_all.png)

Figure 7. Pitch speed, all.
:::

::: {#attachment_1443 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure8_PitchAcceleration_boxplot_all.png)

Figure 8. Pitch acceleration, all.
:::

::: {#attachment_1444 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure9_WPM_boxplot_all.png)

Figure 9. WPM, All
:::

::: {#attachment_1445 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure10_ComplexityPauses_boxplot_all.png)

Figure 10. Rhythmic complexity of pauses, all.
:::

::: {#attachment_1446 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure11_dynamism_boxplot_all.png)

Figure 11. Dynamism, all
:::

::: {#attachment_1447 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure12_Rhythmic_Complexity_of_Syllables_All.png)

Figure 12. Rhythmic complexity of syllables, all.
:::

These differences between the 100 poets and the Buckeye conversational
speakers suggest that the sampled poetry readings are, on average, less
Expressive and more Formal than conversational speech, and that females
are more Expressive than males in both poetry reading and in
conversational speech.

These gender differences in prosodic measures are in line with
linguistic research that finds female speakers, on average, use a wider
pitch range, associated with greater affective expression than male
speakers.[^48] As a group, male poets might also be roughly
characterized as less Formal and more Conversational than female poets
because, aside from using a slower speaking rate than male
conversational speakers, male poets do not differ from male
conversational speakers as much as female poets do from female
conversational speakers.

**Differences among 50 Female Poets** {#differences-among-50-female-poets style="text-align: center;"}
-------------------------------------

The 25 female poets born before 1960, compared with the 25 female poets
born after 1960, exhibit in these samples:

-   A wider pitch range, faster pitch speed, slightly faster pitch
    acceleration, and greater dynamism overall.

::: {#attachment_1449 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](FIgure13_FemalePoets_PitchRange_boxplot.png)

Figure 13. Female poets, broken down by birth year and recording type,
pitch range.
:::

::: {#attachment_1450 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure14_FemalePoets_PitchSpeed_boxplot.png)

Figure 14. Female poets, pitch speed, broken down by birth year and
recording type.
:::

::: {#attachment_1451 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure15_FemalePoets_PitchAcceleration_boxplot.png)

Figure 15. Female poets, pitch acceleration, broken down by birth year
and recording type.
:::

::: {#attachment_1452 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure16_FemalePoets_Dynamism_boxplot.png)

Figure 16. Female poets, dynamism, broken down by birth year and
recording type.
:::

However, 20 of the 25 sampled recordings of female poets born before
1960 are live readings, while 12 of the 25 sampled recordings from
female poets born after 1960 are live readings.

::: {#attachment_1453 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure17_Female_RecordingType.png)

Figure 17. Female poets, recording type.
:::

Samples of female poets in live readings, compared to female poets in
studio recordings, exhibit some very small, statistically significant
differences:

-   Slightly slower pitch speed (1.18 octaves per sec. for readings, vs.
    0.98 octaves per sec for studio recordings)
-   Slightly lower dynamism (7.6 for readings, vs. 6.8 for studio
    recordings)

::: {#attachment_1454 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure18_Female_Poets_Pitch_Speed_RecordingType.png)

Figure 18. Female poets, pitch speed recording type.
:::

::: {#attachment_1455 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure19_Female_Poets_Dynamism_RecordingType.png)

Figure 19. Female poets, dynamism and recording type.
:::

Are the apparent differences, then, between younger and older female
poets related to our selection of a larger number of studio recordings
for younger female poets? Probably not.

When we compare sampled recordings of younger female poets in live
readings to sampled recordings of older female poets in live readings,
we find even more marked differences.  (And again, the recordings are
roughly contemporary with one another; that is, all of the readings by
both the younger and older female poets date from 1998 or later, with
the exception of Barbara Guest (recorded in 1983), and Louise Glück,
June Jordan, and Heather McHugh (all recorded in 1992). The 20 female
poets born before 1960 in live readings exhibit an average pitch range
of 2.75 octaves, an average pitch speed of 2.05 octaves per second, and
an average pitch acceleration of 2.28 octaves per second squared, while
the 12 female poets born after 1960 sampled from live readings exhibit
an average pitch range of 1.79 octaves, an average pitch speed of 1.04
octaves per second, and an average pitch acceleration of 1.1 octaves per
second squared.

::: {#attachment_1456 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure20_Female_Poets_Pitch_Range_Type.png)

Figure 20. Comparing female poets in live readings born before 1960 and
female poets in live readings born after 1960 on pitch range.
:::

::: {#attachment_1457 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure21_Female_Poets_Pitch_Speed_Type.png)

Figure 21. Comparing female poets in live readings born before 1960 and
female poets in live readings born after 1960 on pitch speed.
:::

::: {#attachment_1458 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure22_Female_Poets_Pitch_Acceleration_Type.png)

Figure 22. Comparing female poets in live readings born before 1960 and
female poets in live readings born after 1960 on pitch acceleration.
:::

What are we to make of these differences, which are not found on the
male side? Interestingly, the narrow pitch range used by female poets
born after 1960 in the sampled recordings of live readings is nearly as
narrow as the average pitch range of all male poets (1.58 octaves), and
the comparatively slow pitch speed and acceleration of the same group of
female poets are even slower than the average values for male poets
(1.17 octaves and 1.26 octaves, respectively). Are contemporary female
poets mimicking a less performative style perpetuated by male poets? Do
male poets set the norm for poetry performance, and as more female poets
succeed in the mainstream literary scene, are they approaching that
norm? Are female poets, in trending toward less performative reading
styles in recent years, reacting against complaints about the dramatic
excesses of Confessional and Beat-related poets, such as those cited
above from Hall and Bernstein?

These are questions worth testing further. In ["The Program Era and the
Mostly White
Room,"](https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/the-program-era-and-the-mainly-white-room/)
Spahr and Young note that,

> While total MFA and undergraduate creative writing degree recipients
> identify as women close to 70 percent of the time, neither the writers
> for mainstream media nor the authors published by small presses nor
> the winners of major prizes are 70 percent women. Instead, they are
> around 70 percent men. The percentage is exactly flipped in all those
> arenas where one might obtain something, from visibility to wages. The
> intensity of the disparity is numerically intense and repetitive.[^49]

One interpretation of so-called creaky voice, but by now means the only
one, is that, by lowering their voices, female speakers are attempting
to sound more masculine and thus more authoritative,[^50] perhaps in
part because lower pitch is associated with physical size and potential
threat across cultures and in non-human species.[^51] Though we do *not*
see a shift toward lower pitch among younger female poets, it may be
that they are imitating, consciously or unconsciously or somewhere in
between, other less Expressive aspects of male poetry reading styles
noted above, namely narrow pitch range and slower pitch speed and pitch
velocity. As long as male poets dominate, in publishing poetry and in
winning poetry prizes, it may be a plausible hypothesis that female
poets have adopted, and will continue to adopt, a less Expressive style
of reading, associated with male poets, as long as that it the norm for
male poets.

Finally, to consider sexual orientation, in the sampled recordings,
female non-heterosexual poets exhibit a slightly wider pitch range than
female heterosexual poets, but the difference is not statistically
significant. Differences in other measures for these two groups are
negligible, nor do we find significant differences between the sampled
recordings of male heterosexual poets vs. male non-heterosexual poets.

 

**Skeptical and Humanist: PennSound vs. Iowa?** {#skeptical-and-humanist-pennsound-vs.-iowa style="text-align: center;"}
-----------------------------------------------

In terms of aesthetic-ideological camps, we also find some significant
differences between sampled recordings from PennSound and those from
other archives, and between twenty Iowa-trained poets and poets who did
not attend Iowa. Male and female poets who earned an MFA at Iowa, vs.
poets who did not, exhibit:

-   a significantly slower speaking rate
-   significantly lower rhythmic complexity of pauses
-   long pauses (nine of the twenty Iowa poets sampled, so nearly half,
    employ pauses of 2 seconds or longer, and four of those nine had
    pauses of 3 seconds or longer)

::: {#attachment_1459 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure23_WPM_IowavsNonIowa_boxplot.png)

Figure 23. WPM, Iowa vs. Non-Iowa.
:::

::: {#attachment_1460 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](FIgure24_RhythmicComplexity_IowavNonIowa.png)

Figure 24. Rhythmic complexity of pauses, Iowa vs Non-Iowa.
:::

Further, male poets who earned an MFA at Iowa may exhibit:

-   a potential trend toward lower dynamism (not statistically
    significant, but interesting)

Finally, Iowa-trained poets born before 1960, vs. non-Iowa trained poets
born before 1960, exhibit an even slower speaking rate:

All of these tendencies could be associated with a comparatively
Dramatic or Formal style.

On the other hand, male and female poets sampled from PennSound, vs.
non-PennSound poets, exhibit:

-   a significantly faster speaking rate
-   few long pauses (of the 33 poets sampled who employ pauses of 2
    seconds or longer, only five (of a total of 23 PennSound poets) are
    found on PennSound (Eileen Myles, Fred Moten, Peter Gizzi, Mei-Mei
    Bersenbrugge, and James Tate, who attended Iowa), and only one
    PennSound poet (Eileen Myles) employs pauses of at least 3 seconds
    or longer.

 

::: {#attachment_1462 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure26_WPM_PennSoundvsOther_boxplot.png)

Figure 26. WPM, PennSound vs. other.
:::

Few long pauses are associated with a Conversational style. Again, of
the nineteen Buckeye conversational speakers, only two had pauses of 2
seconds or longer.

Male PennSound poets, compared to Iowa poets, also exhibit:

-   higher rhythmic complexity of pauses

::: {#attachment_1463 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure27_Complexity_of_Pauses_Male_PennSound_Iowa.png)

Figure 27. Rhythmic complexity of pauses, male PennSound vs. male Iowa.
:::

Arguably, judging from this small sample, Iowa-trained poets may be more
likely to read in a more Formal and/or Dramatic style, in terms of
rhythm and speaking rate, than poets not trained at Iowa, and PennSound
poets may be more likely to read with more Conversational pacing, in
terms of speaking rate, pauses, and rhythmic complexity, compared to
poets not found on PennSound.[^52]

From this comparison between the sampled recordings from poets found on
PennSound vs. Iowa-trained poets, we conclude that speaking rate and
rhythmic predictability may be key factors in the perception of a poet's
reading style as conventional/traditional/mainstream vs.
experimental[---]{.emdash}or humanist vs. skeptical, in Allison's terms.
And indeed, comparatively experimental poets, judging from the PennSound
sampled recordings, may indeed be reading poems faster, with more
idiosyncratic, Conversational rhythmic and timing patterns, perhaps
suggesting a more playful, less serious attitude toward the material,
compared to Iowa-trained poets perceived as more Formal, who might be
thought to treat poetry as a serious, traditional art form, and to
reflect this attitude in a more Formal reading style.

** **

**Intersections of Race, Gender, and Generation** {#intersections-of-race-gender-and-generation style="text-align: center;"}
-------------------------------------------------

What about race and ethnicity? In this sample, we find few statistically
significant differences between racial and ethnic groups. Interestingly,
not only does the trend toward a less Expressive style among younger
versus older female poets hold true among the sampled recordings of
thirteen female African-American female poets, it is more pronounced.
Most of the sampled recordings of the older African-American female
poets are among the most Expressive, while most of the sampled
recordings of the younger African-American female poets are among the
least Expressive.

-   Seven of the ten female poets with the highest values for dynamism
    are African-American poets born before 1960, some associated with
    the Black Arts movement. They are: Wanda Coleman, Sonia Sanchez,
    Harryette Mullen, June Jordan, Lucille Clifton, Jayne Cortez, and
    Rita Dove (Dove is the only Iowa-trained poet).
-   Six of these poets (all but Dove) are also among the ten female
    poets with the fastest pitch speed, and five (all but Dove and
    Cortez) are also among the ten female poets with the fastest pitch
    acceleration.
-   In terms of high dynamism, fast pitch speed and fast pitch
    acceleration, the non-African-American poets who also show up in the
    top ten lists for these values are Marilyn Chin, Amalia Ortiz and
    Rae Armantrout.
-   Three of these poets (Jordan, Sanchez and Cortez) are also among the
    fastest in terms of speaking rate (WPM), again joined by Rae
    Armantrout.

::: {#attachment_1464 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure28_Dynamism_HighvLow_FemalePoets_Barplot.png)

Figure 28. Dynamism, female poets, highest vs. lowest.
:::

::: {#attachment_1465 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure29_Female_Poets_Pitch_Speed_High_vs_Low.png)

Figure 29. Pitch speed, female poets, highest vs. lowest.
:::

::: {#attachment_1466 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure30_Female_Poets_Pitch_Acceleration_High_vs_Low.png)

Figure 30. Pitch acceleration, female poets, highest vs. lowest.
:::

::: {#attachment_1467 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure31_Female_Poets_WPM_High_vs_Low.png)

Figure 31. WPM, female poets, highest vs. lowest.
:::

If we were only to consider the sampled recordings of the older
generation of African-American female poets, these patterns might seem
to suggest that African-American racial identity among female poets is
sometimes associated with an Expressive-Conversational style.

However, turning to the younger African-American female poets:

-   Five of the ten sampled recordings of female poets with the lowest
    values for dynamism are also African-American, three of them born
    after 1960, two before 1960. They are: Tracy K. Smith, Natasha
    Trethewey, Audre Lorde,[^53] Toi Derricotte, Claudia Rankine, and
    Elizabeth Alexander.
-   Just three of the ten sampled recordings of female poets with the
    lowest values for dynamism are white: Louise Glück, Joanna Klink
    (the only Iowa-trained poet of the ten), and Anne Lauterbach.
-   Four of the sampled recordings of female African-American
    poets[---]{.emdash}Lorde, Trethewey, Smith,
    Derricotte[---]{.emdash}also rank among the slowest in pitch speed
    and pitch acceleration. Again, they are joined by Glück and Klink.
-   Three of the same sampled recordings[---]{.emdash}of Lorde,
    Derricotte and Alexander[---]{.emdash}are also among the slowest
    among female poets in terms of speaking rate. Again, they are joined
    by Glück and Klink.
-   Of the five sampled recordings of female African-American poets with
    very slow pitch speed and acceleration and low dynamism, however,
    only Trethewey also exhibits an extremely narrow pitch range. In
    fact, she uses the narrowest pitch range (at 1 octave) of all 50
    female poets.

::: {#attachment_1468 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure32_Female_Poets_Pitch_Range_High_vs_Low.png)

Figure 32. Pitch range, female poets, highest vs. lowest.
:::

What do these female poets have in common who, at least some of the
time, read in a less Expressive, more Formal style, have in common?
Glück and Trethewey are both former U.S. Poets Laureate, Tracy K. Smith
was named U.S Poet Laureate in June 2017, and Elizabeth Alexander read
at President Barack Obama's inauguration in 2008. Alexander was also a
finalist for the Pulitzer Prize in 2006, Glück won it in 1993, Trethewey
won it in 2007, Smith in 2012, and Rankine won the National Book Critics
Circle Award for Poetry in 2014. Four of these poets also attended elite
Ivy League universities; Smith attended Columbia and Harvard, Rankine
and Glück and Columbia only, and Elizabeth Alexander attended the
University of Pennsylvania. Trethewey attended Hollins University.

And what do these female poets have in common who, at least some of the
time, read in a more Expressive and Conversational style? Those who are
not older African-American poets influenced by or associated with the
Black Arts movement include the Tejana poet Amalia Ortiz, sampled from
the Russell Simmons Presents Def Poetry (Def Jam Poetry on YouTube) and
associated with performance poetry, the Iowa-trained Marilyn Chin, and
the break-out mainstream success of the L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E school, Rae
Armantrout. Of the African-American poets in this group, only
Dove[---]{.emdash}whose sampled recording exhibits high dynamism, but
not high values by other Expressive measures[---]{.emdash}has won the
Pulitzer Prize (in 1986) and served as U.S. Poet Laureate. And while all
of these poets have significant reputations, the only other one among
them to win a Pultizer (in 2010) is a white poet, Rae Armantrout.
Clifton's work was nominated for the Pulitzer Prize (in 1980 and 1987).
There is also a slight tendency toward public education among these
poets. Clifton attended Howard University, Armantrout attended UC
Berkeley and San Francisco State, and Dove attended Iowa. Ortiz attended
the University of Texas-Rio Grande Valley, Jordan attended Barnard
College, Cortez attended Compton Community College, Sanchez attended NYU
and Hunter College, Coleman attended CSU Los Angeles, and Mullen
attended UC Santa Cruz and UT Austin.

It seems notable that not one of recordings sampled of younger
African-American female poets fall into the highly Expressive group.
These are poets who, given their mainstream success, are often reading
to the "mainly white room\[s\]" that continue to dominate literary
culture in the U.S., as Spahr and Young have established. It is also
notable that the sampled recordings of African-American female poets are
very well-represented among the lowest and highest values for dynamism,
and that there is a strong correlation between their birth year and
which end of the Expressive spectrum they fall on.

Setting aside the relative appeal of the poems they write to various
audiences, it would seem that, from this limited sample, younger female
African-American poets who read in a less Expressive, more Formal manner
also find more mainstream recognition in white-dominated literary
culture, in terms of prizes and the platform of the U.S. Poet Laureate
office, compared to highly Expressive and more Conversational
African-American female poets. Or to turn it around, female
African-American poets who find mainstream recognition in
white-dominated literary culture[---]{.emdash}who frequently read to
"the mainly white room"[---]{.emdash}also read in a less Expressive,
more Formal manner. It would be interesting to test whether this
tendency intensifies, falls away or persists if we consider a larger
representation of their poetry recordings, and how it plays out over the
course of poets' careers.

Of course, these highly recognized younger female African-American poets
are also mostly of a younger generation than the highly Expressive and
more Conversational African-American poets who have not received such
mainstream recognition. Perhaps in the fact that they are finding
greater recognition, we might see progress toward a more diverse
literary culture[---]{.emdash}but if so, perhaps it is progress on the
performance terms of white mainstream literary culture. This is not to
presume that a more Expressive style is preferable, but we simply note
that judging provisionally from these sampled recordings, female
African-American poets who use a more Expressive style may be less
likely to be found among those who are recognized by mainstream success.

We also want to emphasize that this trend toward a less Expressive
style, which we might arguably associate with male poets, is seen in
this sample across all races and ethnicities among all 25 younger female
poets. Thus it may be that generation and gender trump race in terms of
the trend toward lower expressivity, *or* it may be that
African-American racial identity[---]{.emdash}given that black women
still form a relatively small group among mainstream American
poets[---]{.emdash}is a factor that correlates with even greater
conformity to dominant performance trends. The role of class is not to
be overlooked either, but it is, as noted above, quite difficult to
characterize for poets. If attending Iowa for graduate study in creative
writing and/or attaining mainstream success is correlated with a more
Formal, less Expressive reading style, we speculate that this would be
true across racial groups. However, we found no statistically
significant differences in performance styles between poets trained at
public versus private universities.

Turning to male poets, we seem to find more latitude for different
performance styles, in the lack of trends associated with particular
identity markers. For instance, we not find that sampled recordings of
African-American poets are clustered, like those of African-American
female poets, at the extremes of measures we associated with the most
and least Expressive or Conversational. Among male poets, we do find a
slight difference in terms of pitch range and racial groups;
African-American male poets use a narrower pitch range, on average, than
non-African-American poets, but they may also use slightly faster pitch
acceleration, as a group. Among the ten male poets with the lowest
values for dynamism, we find three Iowa-trained poets[---]{.emdash}Juan
Felipe Herrera (b. 1948), who recently served as U.S. Poet Laureate,
D.A. Powell (b. 1963), and Michael Ryan (b. 1946)[---]{.emdash}and two
younger African-American poets, Fred Moten (b. 1962) and Rowan Ricardo
Phillips (b. 1974). And among the ten poets with the highest values for
dynamism, we find one Iowa-trained poet, Robert Bly (b. 1926), and one
younger African-American poet, Jamaal May (b. 1985).

Compared to sampled recordings of younger female African-American poets,
younger male African-American poets exhibit more variety in performance
styles. In terms of two measures that seem crucial to an Expressive
style[---]{.emdash}pitch speed and pitch acceleration[---]{.emdash}three
of the sampled recordings with the highest values are of
African-American poets: again, Jamaal May, Reginald Dwayne Betts (1980)
and Nathaniel Mackey (b. 1947). Carl Phillips (b. 1959) also appears
among the fastest in pitch acceleration. (May's recording is a
statistical outlier in pitch speed.) However, they keep company with
sampled recordings of an array of older and younger poets who have
little in common in terms of education or race/ethnicity. And sampled
recordings of three relatively younger African-American male poets also
show up among the ten males with the slowest pitch acceleration: Fred
Moten (b. 1962), Terrance Hayes (b. 1971), and Rowan Ricardo Phillips
(b. 1974). Sampled recordings of Carl Phillips and Rowan Ricardo
Phillips also both show up among the ten with the narrowest pitch range,
and no male African-American poets show up among the ten with the widest
pitch range. Just one sampled recordings of a male African-American poet
shows up among the ten slowest male poets in terms of speaking rate
(WPM), which we associate with a more Formal style: Reginald Dwayne
Betts (b. 1980). Sampled recordings of two African-American male poets
show up among the fastest in terms of speaking rate, which we would
associate with a Conversational style: Kevin Young (b. 1970, the current
poetry editor of *The New Yorker*) and Shane McCrae (b. 1975, an
Iowa-trained poet). Interestingly, sampled recordings of five of the ten
poets with the fastest speaking rate are Iowa-trained, three of them
younger poets (Shane McCrae, Robert Bly, Robert Fernandez, b. 1980,
James Tate, b. 1943, and Matthew Rohrer, b. 1970), and three of the ten
poets with the slowest speaking rate are older Iowa-trained poets (Mark
Strand, b. 1934, Michael Ryan, b. 1946, and Juan Felipe Herrera).

There is simply no clear correlation among subgroups of male poets and
particular performance styles (aside from the PennSound / Iowa
differences discussed above,) in terms of racial or ethnic identity or
education or archive or sexual orientation or generation. We do find
that male poets in studio recordings exhibit higher mean pitch, a wider
pitch range, and a lower rhythmic complexity of
phrases[---]{.emdash}that is, less predictable rhythm[---]{.emdash}than
in live readings, which would all be more typical of Conversational
speech. If we compare the 19 male poets born before 1960 vs. the male
poets born after 1960 in live readings, we find almost no difference in
pitch range, pitch speed, or pitch acceleration.

Judging from this limited sample, then, the intersection of race and
generation may be more salient intracategories of analysis for the
performance styles of female poets than for male poets. For us, this
emphasizes the need for considerable nuance in approaching the analysis
of performance styles in terms of identity categories. Legal scholars
have noted that it is absurdly simplistic for notions of identity to be
dictated and analyzed according to the single-axis paradigms of the U.S.
Census. Surely we do not want our notions of the performance styles
available to the contemporary American poet to be single-axis either. In
a 2017 editorial in the *New York Times*, sociologist Herbert J. Gans
argued that the politically divisive notion of a looming non-white
majority in the U.S. has been caused by the Census Bureau's use of
simplistic racial categories and ignorance of the changing meaning
assigned to "white" in U.S. history (\"[The Census and Right-Wing
Hysteria](https://nyti.ms/2pCLrTX).\") Among other things, he notes that
as mixed-race families become ever more common, an increasing number of
mixed-race Americans (especially the children of Latino-white and
Asian-American and white couples) perceive themselves as, and are
perceived by others, as white. In the context of this research, such an
insight again raises the question of whether, judging from this limited
sample, younger female poets of all races and ethnicities are trending
toward a less Expressive performance style perpetuated by male poets,
many of whom are white, even as younger male poets exhibit more variety
in performance styles.

As we analyzed the data from these 100 samples, we often found ourselves
re-thinking the categories we might use in analyzing any large group of
poetry recordings. It may turn out that our twelve prosodic measures are
more useful in analyzing the performances styles of individual poets
over the course of their careers, in longitudinal studies. But perhaps
such large-scale studies may also complement the more common and
innovative work of large-scale textual and image analysis in the digital
humanities, which sometimes counter the prepossessing claims of literary
critics who do not apply computational methods in their research. One
example would be Richard Jean So and Andrew Piper's 2016 research
testing some of Mark McGurl's claims in *The Program Era: Postwar
Fiction and the Rise of Creative Writing* about the influence of
creative programs on postwar U.S. literature.[^54] They found that
"\[white and non-white authors\] based on diction, theme, and syntax ...
in both MFA and non-MFA writing, are impossible to distinguish."

** **

**Can Poet Voice and Other Performance Styles Be Quantified?** {#can-poet-voice-and-other-performance-styles-be-quantified style="text-align: center;"}
--------------------------------------------------------------

If Poet Voice is indeed practiced by the four poets MacArthur discussed
in "Monotony, the Churches of Poetry Reading, and Sound
Studies"[---]{.emdash}Louise Glück, Natasha Trethewey, Juliana Spahr and
Michael Ryan[---]{.emdash}it turns out not to always correspond with a
narrow pitch range. What the sampled recordings of these four poets do
have in common in prosodic measures, compared to the averages for all 50
male and all 50 female poets, are slow pitch acceleration, especially
Glück and Trethewey. The sampled recordings of these two poets also
exhibit very slow pitch speed[---]{.emdash}in fact, both are statistical
outliers for pitch acceleration and pitch speed, compared to all 25
female poets born after 1960[---]{.emdash}while the sampled recordings
of Spahr and Ryan are closer to, but still slower than, average values
for pitch speed. Slower pitch speed and pitch acceleration, again, we
associate with a less Expressive, more Formal Style.

Three of the sampled recordings of these four poets (of Glück,
Trethewey, and Ryan) exhibit a comparatively slow speaking rate, in
Words Per Minute, typical of a Formal style, but in her sampled
recording, Spahr speaks much faster, typical of a Conversational style
and of poets found on PennSound (which she is, and which the other three
are not). In terms of rhythmic complexity of pauses, however, Spahr has
the lowest value of all 100 poets, which would be associated with a
Formal style[---]{.emdash}perhaps reflecting the parallelism, repetition
and anaphora of the poem she reads, "We Arrived"[---]{.emdash}while the
other three exhibit rhythmic complexity of pauses that is close to
average. In terms of low dynamism, the sampled recording of Glück is a
statistical outlier among female poets born before and after 1960.

Can we use these values to discover other poets who seem to use Poet
Voice? Other sampled recordings of female poets with comparatively slow
pitch acceleration and slow pitch velocity include Joanna Klink, Ada
Limon, Tracy K. Smith, Cathy Linh Che, Cecilia Llompart, and Brenda
Shaughnessy. Of these six poets, the sampled recording of Tracy K. Smith
rivals those of Trethewey and Glück for both slow pitch speed and slow
pitch acceleration.

On the male side, the sampled recording of Ginsberg exhibits the slowest
pitch acceleration and slowest pitch speed[---]{.emdash}he is a
statistical outlier for both measures, compared to all 50 male poets.
Though Ginsberg does not seem to us to use Poet Voice, five male poets
who do seem to, in the recordings sampled[---]{.emdash}Brian Teare,
Matthew Zapruder, Jeffrey Yang, Michael Ryan, and Dean
Young[---]{.emdash}share similarly low values for pitch speed and/or
pitch acceleration, and three of them use comparatively slower speaking
rate in Words Per Minute, though only Zapruder exhibits fairly low
rhythmic complexity of pauses. Frank O'Hara, interestingly, in a sampled
recording of "The Day Lady Died," exhibits slow pitch acceleration and
pitch speed; however, his pitch range is more than twice as wide as
Ginsberg's, which typically corresponds with a more Conversational
style.

From this small sample, we would conclude that perhaps when some
listeners hear poets read with one or more of these
characteristics[---]{.emdash}slow pitch speed, slow pitch acceleration,
narrow pitch range, low rhythmic complexity, and/or slow speaking
rate[---]{.emdash}they hear Poet Voice. What Poet Voice seems to
correspond to, in terms of our prosodic measures, is a more Formal, less
Expressive, less Conversational style.

What about other performance styles? Turning to individual poets, we
briefly offer some further characterizations, with examples. Poets who
we would call Conversational, from these sampled recordings, include
those who use a relatively fast speaking rate and a wide pitch range,
similar to the Buckeye conversational speakers. Examples would include
Jayne Cortez, Katie Peterson, Dorothy Lasky, Rae Armantrout, Eileen
Myles, June Jordan and Sonia Sanchez. They all exhibit a speaking rate
of at least 160 WPM, and a pitch range of at least 2 octaves. Male poets
would include Michael Palmer, Amiri Baraka, John Yau, Frank O'Hara,
Kenneth Goldsmith, and CA Conrad, as they all a speaking rate of at
least 160 WPM and a pitch range of at least 1.5 octaves. A
Conversational-Less Expressive poet? Perhaps Fred Moten, who exhibits a
fast speaking rate and low dynamism. A Conversational-Expressive poet?
Perhaps Kenneth Goldsmith, who exhibits a fast speaking rate and high
dynamism. An Expressive-Conversational-Formal poet? Perhaps Maurice
Manning, who uses a fast speaking rate, average rhythmic complexity of
pauses, a fairly wide pitch range, and nearly average pitch speed and
acceleration. He is also a southern poet, born and raised in Kentucky.
Do other southern poets exhibit similar performance styles? We have no
idea. A Dramatic poet might use a slow speaking rate, high dynamism, a
wide pitch range, fast pitch speed and acceleration, and frequent long
pauses; again, our example here is Frank Bidart. A Formal poet would
exhibit low rhythmic complexity and low dynamism[---]{.emdash}e.g, Spahr
and Ginsberg. These speculations might suggest ways that the data we've
collected on sample recordings of 100 American poets can be applied to
describe a complex range of performance styles.

Raphael Allison opens *Bodies on the Line* by offering, as exemplars of
humanist and skeptical styles, an ethnically tinged binary opposition of
poetry performance styles in Ben Lerner's 2011 novel, *Leaving the
Atocha Station*, which takes its title in turn from an Ashbery poem. The
self-conscious narrator Adam Gordon opposes his own "deadpan and
monotonic but surprisingly confident way" of reading with another poet
named Tomas, who is described thus:

> Tomas looked less like he was going to read poetry and more like he
> was going to sing flamenco or weep; he did not say thank you or good
> evening or anything but instead paused dramatically as if to gather
> his strength for what would be by any measure a heroic undertaking...
> he struck me as a caricature of himself, a caricature of El Poeta....
> \[his poetry\] "an Esperanto of clichés."[^55]

So the follower of Ashbery is deadpan, monotone, and confident, the
Spanish poet (this is Madrid) is excessively emotional, self-conscious
and unoriginal. The cultural bias in the narrator's distaste for Tomas's
Expressive reading style is clear.

Allison's lack of reflection on this aspect of it is somewhat
surprising, particularly given the debates that have arisen around the
more performative tendencies in slam poetry, detailed by Susan B.A.
Somers-Willit in *The Cultural Politics of Slam Poetry: Race, Identity,
and the Performance of Popular Verse in America* [^56]. Harold Bloom has
called slam poetry "the death of art."[^57] Coincidentally, Allison is
married to the Pulitzer Prize-winning African-American poet Tracy K.
Smith, who, again, became U.S. Poet Laureate in June 2017, and is the
fourth female African-American poet to receive the Pulitzer Prize for
poetry (the others are Gwendolyn Brooks in 1950, Rita Dove in 1987, and
Natasha Trethewey in 2007). As noted above, in the recording we sampled,
Smith favors a less Expressive style, in terms of low dynamism and slow
pitch velocity and pitch acceleration, and a Formal style, in terms of
low rhythmic complexity and low dynamism, and an average speaking rate.
At 127 WPM, she does not use a fast speaking rate, which we associated
with a Conversational reading style, often found among PennSound /
skeptical poets, but in Allison's impressionistic and approving
descriptions of a skeptical style, avoiding other prosodic patterns we
associate with Expressivity, as she does, seems important. Allison does
not discuss his wife's poetry reading style in the book, but the fact
that, in the sample we analyzed, her performance style seems to
correspond well with his aesthetic-ideological preferences in his
scholarly work suggests the degree to which perception of performance
styles is personal.

Allison does describe in some detail his impressions of two recordings
we sampled in our analysis[---]{.emdash}Allen Ginsberg's Big Table
reading in 1959, and John Ashbery's at the Living Theatre in
1963[---]{.emdash}and finds them to be highly distinct. We quote at some
length his oppositional description of the two poets' performance
styles, in preface to reflecting on how our analysis of prosodic
measures in the sampled recordings of 100 poets may complement and
sometimes counter this sort of attentive, impressionistic close
listening:

> Ginsberg declaim\[ed\] *Howl* in a peremptory style that is truly
> affecting. Sometimes, phrases are emphasized with staccato syllables
> ... Other passages are giving wailing emphasis... And yet other
> recordings of Howl tell a different story... A skeptical counterforce
> to humanist reading was audible in the Dharma Lion himself.
>
> Yet if performer-readers like Ginsberg were touched by the antinomies
> of sixties reading, others were more fully committed to a style in
> which presence was not only out of fashion (or perhaps not yet in
> fashion) but studiously avoided.... Ashbery[---]{.emdash}appropriately
> so, if we key his style to Lerner's Adam Gordon. Ashbery engages in
> which might be termed 'metareading,' a style that ... puts distance
> between voice and poem and from the reader's or listener's own
> relationship to it.... Ashbery's form of reading ... unlike
> Ginsberg's, lacks inflection or dynamic vocal range... and his voice's
> flatness and freedom from affective pitch are
> remarkable[---]{.emdash}almost a performance of nonperformance. While
> it's hard not to hear Ashbery practically straining to steer clear of
> the semiotics of emotion, in a 1999 interview with Daniel Kane,
> Ashbery frames his experience as a reader after returning from Paris
> in the early 1960s as unpracticed amateurism ... the poet's self-image
> is still, decades later, that of the wide-eyed outsider entirely
> unskilled at live reading. And it shows.... \[in his\] affect-free
> monotone.
>
> In a recording of Ashbery reading at the YM-YWHA in 1967, the poet
> Richard Howard introduces Ashbery by referring to this Living Theatre
> performance in legendary terms. According to Howard, Ashbery read with
> extreme dramatic flair that night .... None of this is remotely
> apparent from the recording of this event\[.\][^58]

In this contrastive characterization of Ginsberg's and Ashbery's reading
styles, Allison's confidence in his perceptions is striking, contra the
live witness to Ashbery's Living Theatre reading, Richard Howard, who
formed a very different impression of it. Is one of them more
empirically accurate, in terms of prosodic measures, or are they simply
valuing different aspects of the performance?

The sampled recordings we analyzed, of each poet reading part of a short
lyric poem ("In Back of the Real" and \" 'They Dream Only of America'
\"), cannot be said to characterize either reading overall. Nor is it
apt to compare Ashbery's style in reading mostly short poems with
Ginsberg's manner in reading a very long poem, *Howl,* in which (as
MacArthur has established in "Monotony, the Churches of Poetry Reading,
and Sound Studies") Ginsberg does raise his pitch gradually, as Allison
asserts. At any rate, our comparison of the prosodic measures in the two
sampled recordings does not bear out the strong distinctions Allison
makes between the performance styles of the two poets. In terms of
speaking rate, rhythmic complexity, pitch range, and dynamism, Ashbery
reads a little more conversationally than Ginsberg[---]{.emdash}perhaps
tending toward a slightly more skeptical / PennSound style. In dynamism
and pitch range, Ashbery's sample is close to the mean for all male
poets born before 1960, not unusually flat. If his performance style,
sampled here, is to stand for the skeptical style (which we connect
loosely with a PennSound style, above), patterns in the sampled
recordings of 100 poets might suggest that Ashbery's style is more
common than the humanist style (which we connect loosely with an
Iowa-trained style above), which Allison feels is now dominant. But
then, there is also overlap between the performance style of
Iowa-trained poets and Ashbery's. And if a flatter pitch means flatter
affect means skepticism, Ginsberg's affect is somewhat flatter than
Ashbery's.

::: {#attachment_1469 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure33_Dynamism_Individual_Poets_Groups.png)

Figure 33. Dynamism, individual poets and groups.
:::

::: {#attachment_1470 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure34_Rhythmic_Complexity_of_Pauses_Individual_Poets_Groups.png)

Figure 34. Rhythmic complexity of pauses, individual poets and groups.
:::

::: {#attachment_1471 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure35_Pitch_Range_Individual_Poets_Groups.png)

Figure 35. Pitch range, individual poets and groups.
:::

::: {#attachment_1472 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure36_WPM_Individual_Poets_Groups.png)

Figure 36. WPM, individual poets and groups.
:::

Anecdotally, some members of academic audiences at Stanford University
and the University of Notre Dame, to whom the two recordings have been
played without being told who the poets are, have had trouble
distinguishing between the two voices. Perhaps to the non-specialist,
the similarities in Ginsberg's and Ashbery's voices[---]{.emdash}though
Ginsberg was Jewish and Ashbery is not, they were born a year apart,
both grew up in the Northeast and went on to attend elite universities
there (Harvard and Columbia), both spent considerable time in New York
City, and both were gay[---]{.emdash}trump any minor differences, which
specialist audiences are more attentive to because we know how different
their poetics are.[^59] Ginsberg and Ashbery are very different poets,
of course, but from these sampled recordings, their performance styles
are not so radically distinct from each other, nor is Ashbery markedly
less Expressive than Ginsberg.

 

**Conclusion** {#conclusion style="text-align: center;"}
==============

The sampled recordings of 100 American poets born before and after 1960
represent a tiny slice of each poet's existing recordings, and they tell
us nothing about the evolution of each poet's performance style over
their entire career. These recordings also represent a very small sample
of the rich and diverse profusion of contemporary American poets.
Nevertheless, our research makes the first large-scale attempt that we
know of to measure the prosodic patterns of poetry readings that
audiences, critics and poets respond to, which undoubtedly influence the
reception of a poet's work.

In *The Audible Past: Cultural Origins of Sound Reproduction*, Jonathan
Sterne advances a persuasive critique, from ideological and scientific
perspectives, of what he calls "the audiovisual litany," including the
notions that "hearing tends toward subjectivity, vision tends toward
objectivity" and "hearing is a temporal sense, vision is primarily a
spatial sense."[^60] Of course, vision is no more objective than
hearing, and hearing certainly operates in a spatial as well as temporal
sense. However, one value of our analytical approach is that it, in some
sense, it slows down speech by giving us new ways (new to literary
study, anyway) to think about our perceptions of it. It is undeniable
that the complex experience of speech perception happens too quickly for
us to analyze its every nuance in real time, except by listening again
and again. Recorded sound will not hold still, as a printed text or
image will, for our examination, and thus we find data about prosodic
measures in recorded speech, as well as various forms of visualizing
that data, useful for testing our impressions.

Indeed, the process of conducting this research has taught us to be more
skeptical about our own and others' impressionistic judgments of poetry
performance styles, simply by providing empirical methods for testing
them. In preliminary fashion, it has also allowed us to begin to
precisely describe what constitutes a Formal, Expressive,
Conversational, and Dramatic style. And it has helped us recognize that
we and other listeners often make quick judgments about a poet's
performance style based on a few key features, such as a slow speaking
rate or slow pitch speed[---]{.emdash}as with the refinement of
MacArthur's previous characterization of Poet Voice[---]{.emdash}and
that our preconceptions about a poet and our personal
aesthetic-ideological preferences for certain performance styles may
lead us to stop listening carefully once we make such judgments.

One of the most compelling insights of our research so far is that we
see the most generational differences, in terms of the prosodic measures
of the sampled recordings, among younger and older female poets. This
suggests a possible connection, in the apparent shift toward a less
Expressive style among younger female poets, between larger cultural
trends[---]{.emdash}such as the apparent efforts of women to imitate the
authority of male voices through creaky voice[---]{.emdash}and the
evolution of poetry performance styles. And while we are not surprised
that we did not find strong correlations between race, ethnicity or
sexual orientation and particular performance styles, this negative
result serves as a salutary reminder of poets' individuality and
intersectional identities. At the same time, the possibility that
younger female poets[---]{.emdash}including some of the most highly
recognized younger African-American female poets[---]{.emdash}may trend
toward performance styles that correlate with those of white male poets,
in terms of average prosodic measures, suggests a phenomenon of
assimilation to or preference for mainstream styles perpetuated within
the "mainly white room" of the contemporary U.S. poetry scene. Another
initial insight is that measurable differences in performance styles may
well exist among PennSound/skeptical/experimental and
Iowa-trained/humanist poets[---]{.emdash}specifically, that poets found
on PennSound may be more likely to employ a Conversational, less Formal
performance style, judging from speaking rate and measures of rhythmic
complexity. There will always be exceptions, of course, but these
insights are worth testing on a larger scale, for instance by analyzing
a larger number of recordings of younger and older Iowa-trained poets,
and a larger number of recordings of poets found on PennSound.

Future directions for further research are many. They include the
large-scale analysis of older recordings, going back to Longfellow and
Tennyson, Eliot and Stevens, and so on. If there are clear Modernist
styles of poetry reading, what prosodic patterns characterize them? If
we can describe a consistent style used by Eliot, or Yeats, can we test
whether these styles were as influential as we might think?[^61] Another
interesting question is how much poets vary their prosodic patterns in
reading poetry versus conversation and interviews, which could be
explored by analyzing their prosodic patterns in introductory chitchat
and interviews versus poetry recordings. (In terms of prosodic measures,
we would also like to study variations in amplitude or volume; though
differences in recording equipment can affect volume tremendously,
making it very difficult to compare speakers across recordings, it
should be possible to measure and analyze how much speakers vary their
amplitude within recordings.) Another question of interest would be the
evolution of individual poets' performance styles through exhaustive
analysis of all available recordings, including the investigation of
whether and how much different venues and recording media and contexts
correlate with distinct performance styles. Amiri Baraka and Charles
Bernstein, among others, would both be good subjects for such a study,
as their styles seem to have changed significantly over time. It would
also be fascinating to analyze the performance styles in
non-English-language poetry readings,[^62] and other types of
performative speech, from talking books and audio books to radio drama
to newspeak to film acting to stand-up comedy to political speeches to
academic lectures and TED talks, to discover what their distinct
prosodic features might be and to see what they might have in common
with poetry performance. Poetry reading does not flourish in a cultural
vacuum; it is surely informed by all of the types of speech poets
encounter in their daily lives. It would also be interesting to consider
prescriptive guides to oral interpretation, including elocution manuals,
and to test whether their suggestions are borne out in recordings of
contemporaneous performative speech.

In a 2016 post about "Trump's Prosody" on the Language Log at the
University of Pennsylvania, linguist and computer scientist Mark
Liberman points to early and mid-20^th^ century work on intonation in
order to complain that we have done far too little to study, on a large
scale, the distinctive prosody of social groups. He quotes one H.O
Coleman, from 1914, who said that such "investigations... hitherto have
been deprived of much of their value through inquirers' not going far
enough afield (thus building up a theory on the few obvious examples
that occur to one at the moment)" - that is, generalizing about a social
group's intonation based on a few familiar examples. He also quotes
Dwight Bolinger's excellent unanswered questions from 1949, "What are
the peculiarities of intonation of social groups? We have observed that
preachers, circus barkers, and professors favor certain modes; what are
these modes?" ...And so on. For linguists who wish to be scientists
there is only one scientific procedure: gather the facts first, then
theorize about them.\" Liberman concludes, \"I wish that I could say
that Coleman's and Bolinger's appeals \[to study the prosody of social
groups in depth\] had been definitively answered. There were reasons in
1914 or 1949 or 1978 why it was hard to do what they asked
[---]{.emdash} but we've run out of excuses.\"

Sound studies, in its open-ended and interdisciplinary nature, can allow
humanities scholars to borrow, renovate and be inspired by the methods
and insights of other disciplines. And we are heartened by Liberman's
professional opinion that the field of linguistics has rarely concerned
itself with the analysis of performance styles, especially the
intonation, of particular social groups on a large scale.[^63] This
research is a step in that direction for the study of American poetry in
performance. The last thing we want to do is reduce its rich complexity
to numbers. Instead, quantification of prosodic patterns and
visualization of such data should help test our intuitions, refine our
terms, and deepen the conversation about the evolution of performance
styles in poetry reading and other forms of performative speech.

 

 

 
:::
:::

[^1]: This research was supported by a 2015-16 ACLS Digital Innovations
    Fellowship at the University of California, Davis, and a grant from
    the Research Council of the University at California State
    University, Bakersfield in 2017, and it continues in 2018 with a NEH
    Digital Humanities Advancement grant (see
    <http://textinperformance.soc.northwestern.edu/>). Thanks to Hideki
    Kawahara for generously sharing TANDEM-STRAIGHT, to Dan Ellis for
    helping us set up his pitch-tracking algorithm in Matlab, to Robert
    Ochshorn and Max Hawkins for their development of the invaluable
    tools of Gentle and Drift that allowed much of the initial research
    to be undertaken, to the ModLab and the Digital Scholarship Lab at
    the University of California, Davis, and to undergraduate research
    assistants Pavel Kuzkin and Richard Kim at UC Davis and Mateo Lara
    and David Stanley at CSU Bakersfield. Thanks also to Steve
    McLaughlin, Steve Evans, Christopher Grobe, and Mark Liberman for
    useful advice, and to the helpful audiences in Stanford's Material
    Imagination: Sound, Space and Human Consciousness workshop series
    and at Cultural Analytics 2017 at the University of Notre Dame,
    where some of this research was presented. And thanks to Charles
    Bernstein at the University of Pennsylvania and Tanya Clement at the
    University of Texas, Austin, for their support, and for helping
    establish digital humanities research on audio.

[^2]: quoted in John Darnielle, \"[There Are Other Forces at Work: John
    Cage Comes to
    Halberstadt](https://harpers.org/archive/2016/01/there-are-other-forces-at-work/),\"
    *Harper's Magazine* (Jan. 2016): 1-9. Accessed June 20, 2017.

[^3]: Raphael Allison, *Bodies on the Line: Performance and the Sixties
    Poetry Reading* (Iowa City: Iowa University Press, 2014),7

[^4]: Lesley Wheeler, *Voicing American Poetry: Sound and Performance
    from the 1920s to the Present* (Ithaca: Cornell University Press,
    2008), 140

[^5]: Christopher Grobe, "On Book: The Performance of Reading," *New
    Literary History* 47, no. 4 (2016): 570

[^6]: [Oxford English Dictionary](http://www.oed.com). "Neutral, Adj."
    Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013. Accessed June 3, 2017.

[^7]: Donald Hall, "The Poetry Reading: Public Performance / Private
    Art," *American Scholar* 54, no.1 (1985): 76; our emphasis

[^8]: Charles Bernstein, ed. *Close Listening: Poetry and the Performed
    Word* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1998), 10; our emphasis

[^9]: Grobe, "On Book: The Performance of Reading," 571.

[^10]: quoted in Jean Benedetti, *The Art of the Actor: The Essential
    History of Acting, from Classical Times to the Present Day* (New
    York: Routledge, 2007), 111, 112.

[^11]: Since Smith's piece was published in 2014 in *City Arts* online,
    144 comments had been posted as of October 2016, and it had been
    tweeted 1,912 times, in a sometimes heated discussion of the
    varieties of poetry performance, past and present, and with some
    sincere attempts to describe just what poets are doing with their
    voices when they read. The comments, unfortunately, have since been
    erased.

[^12]: See also Matt Petronzio's somewhat misleadingly titled "The
    Linguistics Behind the Insufferably Annoying Poet Voice" in
    [*Mashables*](http://mashable.com/2015/02/07/poet-voice/#86v4ALyta8qT),
    Feb. 7, 2015. He discusses poet voice with linguist Deborah Tannen,
    who comments that "Contemporary poetry ... can be quite
    conversational, so poets might use 'poet voice' and intonation to
    frame what they're reading as poetry.... assuming a unique voice can
    also give the poet more agency, power or emphasis over his or her
    own words. Tannen talks about W.B. Yeats, whose recording of 'The
    Lake Isle at Innisfree' at the British Library moved her to tears.
    He used bizarre intonation, elongating and wavering the end of each
    line. 'It gave everything extra meaning because it wasn't the
    intonation you expected. It makes you pay more attention to it in a
    more intense and special way,' she says."

[^13]: This goes against both Hall and Bernstein, and, further back,
    against Rainer Marie Rilke, who was enthusiastic about the prospect
    of the "talking-machine" or phonograph; "the talking-machine
    \[should\] receive the sound picture of the verse sequence directly
    from the poet's own lips and not indirectly by way, say, of the
    actor... for he \[the actor\] almost always errs and goes
    astray."((See MacArthur's discussion of the dramatic/neutral debate
    over time in poetry performance in "Monotony," 40-41. Quoted in
    Wyatt Mason, \"[Letter of Recommendation: Audiobooks Read by the
    Author](https://nyti.ms/2llhtq5),\" *The New York Times Magazine*.
    July 13, 2016. Accessed July 30, 2016), 24

[^14]: Allison, *Bodies on the Line*, xiii, xv

[^15]: Allison, *Bodies on the Line*, 231

[^16]: See High Performance Sound Technologies for Access and
    Scholarship (HiPSTAS) led by Tanya Clement, the crucial work of
    Reuven Tsur in cognitive poetics, and Jason Camlot's project
    "SpokenWeb: Conceiving and Creating a Nationally Networked Archive
    of Literary Recordings for Research and Teaching," which includes
    the development of computational tools both for literary analysis
    and for the automation of metadata development for large corpuses of
    digitized literary audio ([spokenweb.ca](http://spokenweb.ca)). See
    also the special issue in 2015 of *Thinking Verse* devoted to
    intonation in 19^th^ through 21^st^ century poetry in English,
    German, and French, co-edited by Natalie Gerber and David Nowell
    Smith, and an Arcade Colloquy on Prosody, co-curated by Gerber and
    Eric Weiskott, forthcoming in 2018. This list is by no means
    exhaustive.

[^17]: 

[^18]: Jody Kreiman and Diane Sidtis, *Foundations of Voice Studies: An
    Interdisciplinary Approach to Voice Production and Perception*. New
    York: Wiley, 2011, 304.

[^19]: Kreiman and Sidtis, *Foundations of Voice Studies*, 305-306.

[^20]: Note: The human voice has multiple component frequencies, or
    harmonics, which are multiples of the fundamental frequency, the
    rate of vocal fold vibration, which we hear as the basic pitch of
    the voice. Other properties of vocal fold vibration can influence
    the sound quality of speech, e.g. making a voice sound breathy,
    creaky, etc. Depending on the shape, length, size and configuration
    of an individual's vocal tract, certain harmonics are amplified,
    while others are dampened, resulting in resonant, or formant,
    frequencies that give an utterance its distinctive sound. Such
    subtleties of voice, while surely relevant in performance styles,
    are beyond the scope of this study.

[^21]: Anne Fernald, "The Perceptual and Affective Salience of Mothers'
    Speech to Infants." In *The Origins and Growth of Communication*,
    5-29, edited by L. Feagans et al. Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1984, 1992.

[^22]: Etienne Lombard, \" Le signe de l'elevation de la voix\" ("The
    sign of the rise in the voice"). *Annales Maladiers Oreille, Larynx,
    Nez, Pharynx* 37 (1911): 101-119.)[---]{.emdash}and when their
    interlocutor is hearing-impaired (Picheny et al., 1986). Just asking
    an individual to "speak clearly" produces speech that is slower and
    has a higher pitch range than laboratory conversational speech ((A.
    R. Bradlow, N. Kraus, and E. Hayes, "Speaking Clearly for Children
    with Learning Disabilities Sentence Perception in Noise," *Journal
    of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research* 46, no. 1 (2003): 80-97.

[^23]: Mark Liberman, \"[Martin Luther King's Rhetorical
    Phonetics](http://itre.cis.upenn.edu/~myl/languagelog/archives/004045.html),\"
    *Language Log*. University of Pennsylvania. Jan. 15, 2007. Accessed
    August 1, 2017.

[^24]: One recent study of temporal sound perception summarizes the
    presently influential view: "Brain function can be conceived as a
    hierarchy of generative models that optimizes predictions of sensory
    inputs and minimizes 'surprise'." H.N. Phillips, et al.
    "Hierarchical Organization of Frontotemporal Networks for the
    Prediction of Stimuli across Multiple Dimensions." *Journal of
    Neuroscience* 35, vol. 25 (2015): 9255-64. In other words, the brain
    generates and constantly chooses among many models that predict the
    sensory inputs it is most likely to receive, with an apparent goal
    of optimal accuracy and minimal surprise, or error. The study goes
    on to show how we are continuously, unconsciously tracking and
    predicting sound timing across multiple dimensions such as
    frequency, intensity, duration, and silent gaps or
    pauses[---]{.emdash}precisely the features that distinguish prosody.

[^25]: The principle spans age and behavioral domain, from infant
    attention to language learning to computer-based "brain-training"
    games.

[^26]: K. Johnson, E.A. Strand, and M. D'Imperio, "Auditory-visual
    Integration of Talker Gender in Vowel Perception," *Journal of
    Phonetics* 27, vol. 4 (1999): 359-384.

[^27]: D.L. Rubin and K.A. Smith, "Effects of Accent, Ethnicity, and
    Lecture Topic on Undergraduates' Perceptions of Nonnative
    English-speaking Teaching Assistants," *International Journal of
    Intercultural Relations* 14, vol. 3 (1990): 337-353.

[^28]: Niedzielski, N. "The Effect of Social Information on the
    Perception of Sociolinguistic Variables." Journal of Language and
    Social Psychology 18, vol. 1 (1999): 62-85.

[^29]: B. Munson, S.V. Jefferson, and E.C. McDonald, "The Influence of
    Perceived Sexual Orientation on Fricative Identification," *The
    Journal of the Acoustical Society of America* 119, vol. 4 (2006):
    2427-2437.

[^30]: Robert Hass, "Listening and Making," *Twentieth Century
    Pleasures*. New York: Ecco (2000): 115

[^31]: Jennifer Stoever, \"[Splicing the Sonic Color-Line: Tony Schwartz
    Remixes Postwar Nueva
    York,](http://socialtext.dukejournals.org/content/28/1_102/59.short)\"
    *Social Text* 28, no.1 (2010): 62.

[^32]: As Shai Burstyn notes in the article "In Quest of the Period
    Ear," about attempts to imagine how contemporary audiences
    experienced medieval music, \"culture plays a highly
    significant[---]{.emdash}though not exclusive[---]{.emdash}role in
    shaping the cognitive skills of its members."((Shai Burstyn, "In
    Quest of the Period Ear,\" *Early Music* 25, no. 4 (1997): 695).

[^33]: See Rosina Lippi-Green's work demonstrating the role of accent
    and other linguistic markers, including intonation patterns, in
    civil rights cases of discrimination.

[^34]: The Listening Booth lists poems as individual playable tracks,
    but does not actually link to an individual track, so the links
    provided in Figure 1 connect to an entire reading by the poet
    relevant poet.

[^35]: For the record, MacArthur has heard 31 of the 100 poets read
    their work in person, is personally acquainted with nineteen of
    them, has published critical work on and/or interviews with six of
    them, and studied creative writing with four of them, as instructors
    or fellow students at Warren Wilson College's MFA Program.

[^36]: For the purposes of linguistic analysis, we categorized
    biological sex as either male or female. While we recognize gender
    identity to be a cultural construct, biological sex at birth
    strongly correlates with the size and length of the vocal tract in
    adulthood, which typically correlates in turn with a higher natural
    pitch range in biological females, compared to biological males. An
    analogy can be made between the human vocal tract and bass, tenor,
    alto and soprano saxophones; the pitch range of each instrument is
    determined by its size, shape and length. In terms of pitch range
    and average pitch, this makes comparisons among speakers of the same
    biological sex somewhat more meaningful than comparisons among
    speakers of different biological gender. For instance, bilingual
    Japanese women have been to use higher pitch in speaking Japanese
    than in speaking English (Ohara), and Japanese women have been found
    to use consistently higher pitch than Dutch women (Bezooijen). Of
    the 100 poets sampled, 99 retain the biological sex of their birth;
    one transgender poet, Trace Peterson, has undergone hormone therapy
    in changing from male to female, and she is grouped with the female
    poets. Sexual orientation we defined as heterosexual and other. We
    did not attempt to confirm the gender identity of
    poets[---]{.emdash}that is, whether or not they consider themselves
    to be cisgender.

[^37]: Patrick Grzanka, Ed. *Intersectionality: A Foundations and
    Frontiers Reader *(New York: Routledge, 2014).

[^38]: We tentatively confirmed the sexual orientation of poets who have
    not made public statements about it by searching on reputable
    websites for mention of a spouse of the opposite biological sex. For
    two poets, we could find no mention of a spouse or of sexual
    orientation.

[^39]: see Matt Petronzio, \"[The Linguistics Behind the Insufferably
    Annoying Poet
    Voice](http://mashable.com/2015/02/07/poet-voice/#86v4ALyta8qT),\"
    *Mashables*. February 7, 2015. Accessed June 20, 2017, footnote 2

[^40]: see Lisa Anne Basile, \"[Poet Voice and Flock Mentality: Why
    Poets Need to Think for
    Themselves](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/lisa-marie-basile/poet-voice-flock-mentality_b_5830452.html),\"
    *Huffington Post*. September 16, 2014.

[^41]: "They were interviewed in a small seminar room by \[either a\]
    male postdoc \[or a\] female graduate student ...  \[and\] were told
    that the purpose of the study was to learn how people express
    "everyday\" opinions in conversation. Each interview began with a
    few questions about the talker concerning his/her age, place of
    birth, family make-up, etc. This ... \[led\] to questions that
    easily elicited opinions, such as how Columbus has changed over the
    years, how families get along, how children should be raised, etc.
    These topics in turn offered opportunities for talkers to express
    other opinions. In order to elicit more conversation, the
    interviewer often challenged the talker with other points of view,
    or asked for illustrations of alternative opinions. As the session
    proceeded, talkers become less inhibited and the interview
    approximated a friendly conversation.... Interviews lasted from 30
    to 60 minutes, with the latter being the target length.\" (Buckeye
    Corpus 3).

[^42]: Kawahara's home page at Wakayama University includes several
    tutorials and guides to TANDEM-Straight. This [one-minute
    movie](http://www.wakayama-u.ac.jp/~kawahara/STRAIGHTadv/Resources/DCremoveAndAutoTrackEdit.mov)
    walks through the basic steps, and this
    [three-minute](http://www.wakayama-u.ac.jp/~kawahara/STRAIGHTadv/Resources/STRAIGHTGUIv1.mov)
    movie shows how to manipulate the different aspects of the Graphic
    User Interface, including f0 (pitch), duration (ratio), and so on.
    TANDEM-STRAIGHT is compatible with Matlab, but the GUI can also
    function without it, and the user can save manipulated files as WAV
    files. In 2016, some of Kawahara's colleagues released another
    speech synthesis tool that may prove as or more useful than
    TANDEM-STRAIGHT, called World: <https://github.com/mmorise/World>.
    We are exploring it for future research.

[^43]: Gentle, which can be downloaded for free and installed on Macs,
    is built on top of an open-source speech recognition toolkit
    developed at Johns Hopkins University,
    [Kaldi](http://kaldi.sourceforge.net/about.html), which uses modern
    neural network-based acoustic modeling, trained on thousands of
    hours of recorded telephone conversations. Gentle was designed
    specifically to function with more flexibility than
    [FAVE](http://fave.ling.upenn.edu/) (Forced Alignment and Vowel
    Extraction), a tool developed in the Linguistics Lab at the
    University of Pennsylvania and commonly used by linguists, to be
    \"easier to install and use....

[^44]: While a full review of linguistic research considering speaking
    rate, pause rate and duration and pitch speed is beyond the scope of
    this study, we refer readers to T. Kendall's useful *Speech Rate,
    Pause and Sociolinguistic Variation: Studies in Corpus
    Sociophonetics* (2013) and to the comparatively scant existing work
    on pitch change and pitch speed. See J. J. Ohala and W. G. Ewan,
    "Speed of pitch change," The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
    America 53, no. 1 (1973): 345-345; P. Gramming et al. "Relationship
    between changes in voice pitch and loudness," Journal of Voice 2,
    no. 2 (1988): 118-126, J. Sundberg, "Data on maximum speed of pitch
    changes." Speech transmission laboratory quarterly progress and
    status report 4 (1973): 39-47; K. Alho et al. "Event-related brain
    potential of human newborns to pitch change of an acoustic
    stimulus," Electroencephalography and Clinical
    Neurophysiology/Evoked Potentials Section 77, no. 2 (1990): 151-155;
    B. Maess et al. "Localizing pre-attentive auditory memory-based
    comparison: magnetic mismatch negativity to pitch change."
    Neuroimage 37, no. 2 (2007): 561-571; and Y. Xu and X. Sun, "Maximum
    speed of pitch change and how it may relate to speech." The Journal
    of the Acoustical Society of America, 111 no. 3 (2002): 1399-1413.

[^45]: All Rhythmic Complexity measures are unitless, calculated using
    the Lempel-Ziv algorithm to estimate Kolomogorov complexity, also
    used for compression, as with gif or zip files. These measures are
    normalized for audio length. The idea is to find any and all
    repeated temporal patterns, counting speech and moments of pause vs.
    speech or voiced vs. unvoiced as 1's and 0's respectively over time.
    For pause complexity we used pause (1) vs. speech (0), and for
    syllabic and phrasal complexity we used voiced vs unvoiced, since
    voiced speech power tends to drive the sense of vocal rhythm. All
    three complexity measures reflect how many unique speech-pause or
    voiced-unvoiced patterns are required to combine in order to
    reproduce the observed speech-pause signal. The more easily one can
    reconstruct the data with a set of repeated patterns, the simpler it
    is, i.e. lower rhythmic complexity, or more predictable, regular
    rhythm. As a generalization, the more predictable a poet's rhythmic
    measures, the more formally they may read, while the less
    predictable, the more conversationally they may read.

[^46]: Please see MacArthur and Miller, "After Scansion," forthcoming in
    Stanford's Arcade Colloquy series in 2018, and ["Vocal Deformance
    and Performative
    Speech"](https://soundstudiesblog.com/2016/10/24/in-different-voices-vocal-deformance-and-performative-speech/)
    in *Sounding Out*!, from 2016, for discussion of the expressive
    meaning of rising and falling intonation in brief samples of poetry
    recordings.

[^47]: See M.L. Stoicheff, "Speaking Fundamental Frequency
    Characteristics of Nonsmoking Female Adults," Journal of Speech,
    Language and Hearing Research 24, no. 3 (1981): 437-441; M. Nishio
    and S. Niimi, "Changes in Speaking Fundamental Frequency
    Characteristics with Aging," Folia Phoniatrica et Logopaedica 60,
    no. 3 (2008): 120-127.

[^48]: See, for example, I.R. Titze, "Physiologic and acoustic
    differences between male and female voices," The Journal of the
    Acoustical Society of America 85, no. 4 (1989): 1699-1707; Elinor
    Ochs, "Indexing gender," In Rethinking context: Language as an
    interactive phenomenon, edited by B. Miller, 335-358. New York:
    Cambridge University Press, 1992.

[^49]: Juliana Spahr and Stephanie Young, \"[The Program Era and the
    Mainly White
    Room](https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/the-program-era-and-the-mainly-white-room/),\"
    Los Angeles Review of Books. Sept. 20, 2015. Accessed June 1, 2017.

[^50]: Ikuko Patrica Yuasa, "Creaky Voice: A New Feminine Voice Quality
    for Young Urban-Oriented Upwardly Mobile American Women?" American
    Speech 85, No. 3 (2010): 315-337.

[^51]: J.J. Ohala, "Cross-Language Use of Pitch: An Ethological View."
    Phonetica 40 (1983):1-18.

[^52]: NOTE: Of the twenty Iowa-trained poets, only two of the
    recordings were found on PennSound: James Tate and Jorie Graham. Two
    other Iowa-trained poets we sampled can be found on
    PennSound[---]{.emdash}Joshua Clover and Matthew
    Rohrer[---]{.emdash}but we sampled recordings of them from other
    websites. Tate reads at 157 WPM, and Rohrer at 156, unusually fast
    for Iowa-trained poets in this sample, but in line with PennSound
    poets. Graham is typically Iowa-slow, at 115 WPM, though her
    experimental aesthetics make her an obvious fit with PennSound.
    Clover is average, at 132 WPM, though it's possible he might have
    read slower than usual in the recording sampled, for the benefit of
    some non-native-English speakers, because he was reading in Paris.
    Notably, this sample shows no significant differences in pitch
    measures.

[^53]: The recording sampled by Lorde is a studio recording from very
    late in her life, while the others are live readings. Lorde uses a
    comparatively wider pitch range than Smith, Trethewey, Derricote,
    Rankine and Alexander.

[^54]: So and Piper, \"[How Has the MFA Changed the Contemporary
    Novel](http://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2016/03/mfa-creative-writing/462483/)?\"
    *The Atlantic*, March 6, 2016.

[^55]: Lerner 35, quoted in Allison, *Bodies on the Line* xi-xiii.

[^56]: Susan B.A. Somers- Willett, *The Cultural Politics of Slam
    Poetry: Race, Identity, and the Performance of Popular Verse in
    America,* (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2009).

[^57]: quoted in Somers-Willit, *The Cultural Politics of Slam Poetry.*

[^58]: Allison, *Bodies on the Line,* 6-9.

[^59]: Interestingly, at Harvard, Ashbery and Frank O'Hara bonded over
    the fact that they had similar "hayseed accents." He remembered of
    their first meeting: "it was rather a surprise when I overheard a
    ridiculous remark such as I liked to make uttered in a ridiculous
    nasal voice that sounded to me like my own, and to realize the
    speaker was Frank.... Though we grew up in widely separated regions
    of the Northeast ... we both inherited the same twang, a hick accent
    so out of keeping with the roles we were trying to play that it
    seems to me we probably exaggerated it, later on, in hopes of making
    it seem intentional ... it fascinated us and was doubtless a reason
    why we became friends so quickly after our first meeting. On the
    telephone, I was told, we were all but indistinguishable. Once when
    I was at Frank's apartment in New York I picked up the phone and
    impersonated Frank to Joe LeSueur, one of Frank's closest friends,
    pretending to pick a quarrel with him for several minutes during
    which he was entirely taken in. Another time when Frank came to
    visit my parents' farm in upstate New York he walked into the
    kitchen one evening when my mother was washing dishes and asked if
    he could help; without turning around from the sink my mother said,
    'No, John, go back in and talk with your friends'. " (Ashbery,
    *Selected Prose*, 171-172.) While the perceived similarities in
    their voices, as related to accent and nasality, are not among the
    prosodic measures we consider here, it is interesting that their
    average pitch is identical in the sampled recordings
    here[[---]{.emdash}]{.emdash}122 hz[[---]{.emdash}]{.emdash}and
    their pitch speed is similar, at 1.1 (Ashbery) and .8 (O'Hara)
    octaves per second. However, in these samples, O'Hara uses a
    relatively faster speaking rate (177 WPM vs. Ashbery's 140 WPM) and
    a wider pitch range (2.3 octaves vs. Ashbery's 1.3 octaves).

[^60]: Jonathan Sterne, The Audible Past: Cultural Origins of Sound
    Reproduction. Durham (NC: Duke UP, 2003), 15).

[^61]: See our slight manipulation of a recording of Yvor Winters, who
    approaches Yeats's reading style in terms of pitch and timing
    patterns, in \"[Vocal Deformance and Performative
    Speech.](https://soundstudiesblog.com/2016/10/24/in-different-voices-vocal-deformance-and-performative-speech/)\"

[^62]: We are working with Aurelio Meza, a Ph.D. candidate at Concordia
    University, to analyze Voz viva, "the earliest, longest-running and
    most emblematic literary audio collection in Mexico, which includes
    1,680 audio tracks in WAV format (73.2 GB), with roughly 1,000
    poetry tracks."

[^63]: With Neville Ryant, Liberman has recently analyzed a large number
    of recordings from National Public Radio's *Fresh Air*, YouthPoint,
    political speeches and LibriSpeech, considering three
    variables[---]{.emdash}pitch range, length of utterance, and length
    of pause[---]{.emdash}to differentiate between
    "spontaneous"and"read" speech. See "Automatic Analysis of Phonetic
    Speech Style Dimensions."
