---
author: 'Lynne Tatlock, Matt Erlin, Douglas Knox, and Stephen Pentecost'
date: '03.22.18'
shortauthor: 'Lynne Tatlock et al.'
shorttitle: Crossing Over
title: |
    Crossing Over: Gendered Reading Formations at the Muncie Public Library,
    1891-1902
---

::: {.entry .print-only}
::: {#post-1291 .post-1291 .post .type-post .status-publish .format-standard .has-post-thumbnail .hentry .category-articles}
###### *Peer-Reviewed By: James Connolly & Anon. *

###### *Clusters: [Gender](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/02/gender/) *

###### *Article DOI: [10.22148/16.021](http://doi.org/10.22148/16.021)*

###### *Dataverse DOI: [10.7910/DVN/QOFLEZ](http://dx.doi.org/10.7910/DVN/QOFLEZ)*

###### *PDF: [10.31235/osf.io/k29bw](https://dx.doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/k29bw)*

###### *Journal ISSN: 2371-4549*

###### Cite: *Lynne Tatlock, Matt Erlin, Stephen Pentecost, and Douglas Knox, "Crossing Over: Gendered Reading Formations at the Muncie Public Library, 1891-1902,"* Journal of Cultural Analytics. *March 22, 2018. DOI: [10.31235/osf.io/k29bw](https://dx.doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/k29bw)*

 

Readers are never merely passive recipients of textual messages.[^1] One
of the most powerful insights of reader-response theory in the 1970s and
1980s is that the meaning of a text never resides entirely within the
artifact itself. Commentators from Carlo Ginzberg ("aggressive
originality"), to Jauss ("horizon of expectations"), to Fish
("interpretive communities"), and Radway ("Reading is not Eating") have
long-since established that readers are creators of meaning.[^2] To
quote Tony Bennett, meaning \"is not a *thing* that texts can *have,*
but is something that can only be produced, and always differently,
within the reading formations that regulate the encounters between texts
and readers.\"[^3] Yet even as it challenges the very idea that texts
exist independently of readers and their institutional and social
contexts, Bennett's concept of a "reading formation" also reminds us
that there are socio-historically determined limits to creative
appropriation. For Bennett, text, context, and reader constitute an
inseparable unity; every reading situation is shaped by "discursive and
intertextual determinations that organize and animate the practice of
reading. . . ."[^4] A rich and nuanced account of the complex balance
between social determination and autonomy therefore requires a
combination of methods, both a consideration of textual features and
investigation of book-historical, ideological, institutional, and social
pressures.

Computational methods are uniquely suited to contribute to
investigations of reader agency along the lines described by Bennett and
others. At first glance, this claim might seem surprising. The current
focus on pattern recognition within large corpora and the use of such
techniques as cluster analysis and topic modeling have tended to
downplay reader agency and heighten attention to "objective" textual
features. This emphasis need not be viewed negatively. If predictive
models can identify detective fiction with 90% accuracy, one is inclined
to believe, *pace* Bennett, that at least certain (perhaps rather
rudimentary) aspects of meaning are in fact "thing\[s\] that texts can
have."[^5] These approaches, however, can also be combined with
quantitative analyses of reader behavior to enhance our understanding of
how meaning is co-constructed; indeed, much of the reader-response
research done outside of the field of literary studies already has a
quantitative-ethnographic orientation, and some work within literary
studies has made use of such resources as the reader reviews on
Amazon.com to draw conclusions about reading and ethnicity.[^6] The
central challenge for studying nineteenth-century reading practices is
to identify datasets that will enable scholars to scale up these
analyses.  Library circulation records potentially constitute a rich
source of such data.

The digitized Muncie database, *What Middletown Read?*, a unique
resource for the study of library circulation records with regard to
books checked out and the gender, age, ethnicity, and occupation of
borrowers, offers precisely such a dataset, one that we have been able
to download and convert to forms still more amenable to exploration and
computation.[^7] We have mined these data to examine popular reading
within a specific institution in a particular historical period. Our
analysis, which interweaves thick description with a consideration of
broad patterns, consists of three parts. We first provide a description
and analysis of gender-normative reading among children and adolescents
in nineteenth-century Muncie. Some of our results will, in their broad
outlines, be familiar to historians of reading.[^8] The specificity of
the Muncie data, however, also enables us to provide an unusually
detailed snapshot of reader choice in an era marked by increasing market
segmentation and a surge in the publication of books and magazines
specifically targeted toward one or the other gender.[^9] Only by
considering the full range of pressures to conform to gendered reading
expectations, as well as their powerful impact on borrowing pattterns,
can we grasp the extent to which checking out a particular book
constitutes an expression of agency, especially where these choices
resist such pressures. Such choices constitute the focus of the second
section, in which we turn to crossover reading by patrons seventeen and
under. Here we build on and extend recent scholarship on the topic, both
by identifying certain categories of books that were read frequently by
both boys and girls as well as by providing a more differentiated and
relational account of crossover titles. The third part focuses on
Horatio Alger, Jr., whose books were widely read by this group but,
based on book borrowing patterns, constitute a category unto themselves.
With Alger as our springboard, we offer some provisional reflections on
how, at the turn of the twentieth century, early popular crossover
reading was connected to convergent reading in adulthood. By crossover
reading we mean the reading by the non-targeted gender of overtly
gender-targeted fiction that was otherwise most frequently read, as
intended, by persons of the targeted gender. We use the term convergent
reading in turn to refer to the selection of fiction[---]{.emdash}not
overtly specified to gender, e.g., as "books for women" or "books for
men"[---]{.emdash}by persons of either gender at similar rates relative
to the respective gender group.[^10]

 

Popular Reading in an Institutional Context {#popular-reading-in-an-institutional-context style="text-align: center;"}
-------------------------------------------

Public libraries of course constituted but one source of reading
materials for Americans and their communities in the late nineteenth
century. As a public-funded institution, however, the library bore a
special responsibility to its users and the greater community,
especially given the widely shared belief in the importance of reading
for building character, conveying values, upholding community standards
of morality and religious belief, and maintaining social order and
harmony. Given this understanding of the library, librarians, organized
as professionals in the 1870s, took their responsibilities seriously as
upholders of the faith, educators, and mediators of social ethics,
indeed as what Dee Garrison has termed "apostles of culture."[^11] Many
of them considered it their mission to exert control over the choices of
library users. The reading of novels in particular occupied center stage
in their debates about library holdings and institutional influence on
patrons' reading habits.[^12]

While the ability of the library as a public institution actually to
cultivate good taste was in the end questionable, power over
acquisitions and regulation of the length of the borrowing period and
the number of books that could be borrowed at one time supported that
perceived mission. While some libraries simply restricted the number of
novels that readers could check out according to the "two-book system"
(two books could be checked out simultaneously if at least one of them
was *not* a novel), others restricted their holdings to putatively
"wholesome" or important books, be they classic or popular, as
prescribed by, for example, the American Library Association's *Catalog
of "A.L.A." Library* of 1893, a list of 5,000 books for a popular
library representing "the best thought of competent judges in various
departments."[^13]

Dee Garrison, however, identifies overall a shift in attitudes toward
fiction by around 1900, as a new generation of librarians espoused a new
realism about the importance of honoring the taste of the publics
served. One Charles Bolton, librarian at the Boston Athenaeum, observed
that "the libraries which did not buy a novel until it was one year old
were driving off influential and educated patrons."[^14] While a decade
earlier the purpose of the library as institution was seen to be
reformative and educational, as the century waned, not only the idea
that the library should also provide entertainment, but additionally the
notion that the people themselves should exercise authority over what
they read gained traction.  But the view that people should read what
they chose was not new: in 1880 in an essay titled "What to Read," Fred
B. Perkins, charting a more self-directed reading, undermined Emerson's
rules for reading when he observed that such rules amount to "a record
of what the codifier has found to suit his individual character." If,
however, one added to Emerson's rules "unless you like," he suggests,
they would work perfectly well.[^15]

The Muncie Public Library erred if anything on the side of giving its
patrons what they wanted.  In the 1890s Muncie showed a marked
"willingness to cater to popular tastes," stocking books not recommended
(and sometimes resolutely eschewed) by professional librarians, such as
juvenile fiction by Horatio Alger, Oliver Optic (pseud. of William
Taylor Adams), Harry Castlemon (pseud. of Charles Austin Fosdick),
Edward Sylvester Ellis, Susan Coolidge, and Martha Finley.[^16] As Frank
Felsenstein and James J. Connolly note, the library in particular
"catered to this demand \[for children's literature\], at times edging
close to the line that divided what some considered moral from immoral
fiction."[^17] Indeed, the "friendly amateurs" who ran the library, "did
little to direct users toward what the moral pundits of the day deemed
proper reading."[^18] The Muncie Library permitted borrowers to check
out one book at a time for two weeks, placing no overt restrictions on
the choice of book.  Still, the holdings of the library from which a
given reader could select a book to some degree reflect shared standards
and tastes of the period.

While Felsenstein and Connolly assert that Muncie holdings do not
indicate that "the Muncie Public Library even took notice of the ALA
catalogue," our research indicates, nevertheless, that roughly 68% of
the authors (not necessarily the individual books) on the A. L. A.
list[---]{.emdash}a decidedly middlebrow collection of
authors[---]{.emdash}were in fact held by the library and also read. As
our research also indicates and as we discuss below, the Muncie library,
especially in the last years of our dataset, acquired ever more
contemporary novels aimed at adults[---]{.emdash} many of them
bestsellers. These relatively new works, moreover, were generally
checked out repeatedly subsequent to their arrival in the library.
Nevertheless, Felsenstein and Connolly rightly point out the abundance
and popularity of especially juvenile fiction in Muncie, fiction that
the A. L. A. catalogue largely ignores.[^19]

 

The Muncie Database[---]{.emdash}First Pass {#the-muncie-databasefirst-pass style="text-align: center;"}
-------------------------------------------

The Muncie database captures borrowing information from the circulation
records of the Muncie, Indiana, Public Library from November 5, 1891,
through December 3, 1902, with a year and a half hiatus from May 28,
1892, to November 5, 1894. Of the 6,329 patrons listed in the library's
records who were enrolled during the years 1875-1902,[^20] 4,024 patrons
borrowed at least one book or periodical for a total of 176,912
checkouts during the time period in question. On the basis of these
records, Felsenstein, Connolly, and their collaborators were able to
pull data from the US census and other sources to determine the sex and
additional demographic data (e.g., occupation, year of birth, household
size) for approximately 64% of them.[^21] In roughly 33,000
transactions, the borrower (the person signing the record for the
purpose of checking out the library book) does not match the patron (the
holder of the library card); in such cases, even though we have census
data for the patron, we cannot use it to describe the borrower, whom we
infer to be the actual reader. Culling these mismatches from our dataset
as well as those transactions for which we have no demographic
information reduces the number of transactions to 112,298. For the
purpose of a more finely grained analysis anchored in a particular
historical context, we, furthermore, created a still smaller subset
consisting of all the transactions from the year 1895 through December
3, 1902, when the records end. These are the years in which the records
are nearly complete for the given years (before that they comprise only
a few months of each year) and they are also the years for which we have
solid information concerning best-selling books in the United States. We
shall explain below the importance of bestsellers to our analysis.[^22]

In 2013, with the permission of Felsenstein and Connolly, we captured
this dataset and experimented with ways of querying and visualizing the
data it provides.[^23] One of the most eloquent visualizations resulting
from these first experiments, an interactive bubble graph, tells a
powerful story with regard to library transactions.  In this
visualization reading patterns are plotted according to gender and
median age of borrowers as these categories intersect with authors. 
Each bubble stands for a distinct author; the larger the bubble, the
greater the number of transactions.  The x-axis indicates the percentage
of the transactions attributable to male users; the y-axis indicates the
median age of borrowers with reference to authors.

This visualization of the Muncie data suggests a number of striking
patterns: 1) the transactions skew toward younger readers, most of them
by patrons under 30; 2) the highest circulating authors and the highest
circulating titles, moreover, comprise juvenile reading, fiction
intended from the start for adolescents and children; 3) at younger ages
reading separates by gender into "boy books" and "girl books"
concentrated on a few select authors; 4) the majority of adult reading
appears to be adult female reading; and 5) some authors appear to be
read in roughly equal numbers by both male and female adult borrowers.

::: {#attachment_1311 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure_1_bubble.jpg)

Figure 1. Bubble visualization showing the median age and percentage of
male readers by author. The size of the bubble indicates the number of
transactions relative to the total transactions for the aggregate data.
[^24]
:::

 

Reading the Muncie Library by the Book {#reading-the-muncie-library-by-the-book style="text-align: center;"}
--------------------------------------

While suggestive, these patterns of reading by author require a more
finely grained analysis. To interrogate them, we therefore elected to
examine data for individual books as well. Using data generated from the
subset of transactions from January 1895 through December 3, 1902,
described in section III, we compiled a list of male and female borrower
percentages for each of the titles that circulated for which we had
demographic data[---]{.emdash}a total of 3,797 books and periodicals.
Since so many of these titles circulated infrequently, we limited our
investigation to the top quartile of titles as measured by number of
check-outs and also eliminated periodicals. 907 titles that circulated
39 times or more for a total of 70,798 transactions remained. Our aim
was to determine what these data could tell us about the degree to which
reading was gendered generally, which high-circulating books were
borrowed mainly by one sex only, and which books were most popular with
both groups.

In the aggregate, slightly more than half (54%) of all books for which
we have demographic data were checked out by girls or women. In order to
adjust our percentage distributions to account for the greater total
number of female checkouts and the variety in total number of checkouts
for each book, we calculated a simple measure of percentage divergence
from the expected value of the number of checkouts for any given book,
the expected value being the number of transactions that would have
taken place if the distribution for that given book followed the overall
distribution of roughly 54% female and 46% male. The result provided a
rough measure of gender specificity in borrowing patterns for any given
book.

Identifying the top quartile among all of the books with a discrepancy
score greater than zero yields 82 books that are heavily skewed male.
These books have male checkout percentages ranging from roughly 85% to
98% of the total and an average of 80 total transactions per book.
Taking the same approach to the books with a discrepancy score less than
zero yields 156 titles with checkout rates between 76% and 92% and an
average of 90 total transactions.

A cursory glance at the titles and authors in each group, as in our
first look at authors above, immediately reveals that, in the case of
male borrowers, markedly gendered reading is almost exclusively
adolescent reading of serial fiction. Among the 82 books that skew
heavily male, many are written by the aforementioned well-known authors
of "boys books": 13 titles by Ellis, 19 titles by Castlemon, 12 titles
by Optic, 5 by Kirk Munroe, and 4 by George Alfred Henty. The average of
the median age of the borrowers of these five authors, whose books
account for almost three-fourths of all transactions in this subset, is
15. In the case of the books that skew strongly female, the situation is
somewhat more complex, but the predominance of serial adolescent fiction
still holds. We find 21 titles by Finley, 10 by Susan Coolidge, 9 by L.
T. Meade, 5 by Margaret Sydney, 4 by Louisa May Alcott, and 3 by
Margaret Bouvet. For these authors as well, the average of the median
ages is 15, but the checkouts attributed to them amount to a bit fewer
than half of all transactions (45%) among the highly skewed texts. In
contrast to the male-skewed borrowings, in other words, the
female-skewed borrowings for this subset include a wider range of
authors and titles that are also checked out by adult readers,
including, for example 10 by Clara Louise Burnham (median age 24) and 6
by Rosa Nouchette Carey (median age 22).[^25]

Simple text-mining analyses applied to a subset of these texts can help
to reinforce and to nuance existing scholarship on adolescent reading in
the period, providing us with a differentiated account of how
gender-targeted reading material correlates with the divergent book
choices of male and female patrons.  After compiling an electronic
corpus of 69 of the highly male-skewed titles and 88 of the highly
female-skewed books, we applied the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count
(LIWC) package to each title to calculate word frequencies across the 93
dimensions measured by the software.[^26] We then ran a Mann-Whitney U
test on the distributions of scores for each corpus to compare the two
corpora across the categories. Tables 1 and 2 list the top 15
most-distinguishing LIWC "output variables" (of 93 total) for the books
in each corpus.[^27]

                      girlboy\_stat   girlboy\_rho
  ------------------- --------------- --------------
  female referents    6051            1.00
  sadness             5887            0.97
  positive emotions   5758            0.95
  Affect Words        5662            0.93
  assent              5545            0.91
  home                5524            0.91
  nonfluencies        5511            0.91
  religion            5498            0.91
  family              5468            0.90
  certainty           5464            0.90
  hearing             5416            0.89
  perception          5401            0.89
  Social Words        5336            0.88
  Emotional Tone      5284            0.87
  health              5279            0.87

Table 1. LIWC variables most characteristic of female-borrowed
books.Capitalized variables refer aggregate categories in the LIWC
dictionaries.

[ ]{style="line-height: 1.4em;"}

                          girlboy\_stat   girlboy\_rho
  ----------------------- --------------- --------------
  comparatives            1933            0.32
  work                    1883            0.31
  Core Drives and Needs   1803            0.30
  motion                  1657            0.27
  anger                   1624            0.27
  male referents          1555            0.26
  space                   1498            0.25
  reward focus            1468            0.24
  3rd pers plural         1331            0.22
  risk/prevention focus   1313            0.22
  achievement             992             0.16
  Analytical Thinking     644             0.11
  numbers                 574             0.09
  prepositions            369             0.06
  articles                364             0.06

Table 2. LIWC variables most characteristic of male-borrowed books.
Capitalized variables refer aggregate categories in the LIWC
dictionaries.

Grammatical categories[---]{.emdash}e.g., "comparatives" and
"prepositions"[---]{.emdash}while intriguing, are hard to interpret in
terms of gender.[^28] More immediately revealing in this regard are such
semantically resonant categories as "sadness," "positive emotions,"
"home," "affect words," and "family" for the female-borrowed books and
"analytical thinking," "achievement," "risk/prevention focus," "space,"
and "anger" for the male-borrowed books.  We also used topic modeling in
order to identify more specific indicators of thematic content. Fitting
a 10-topic model to the male-skewed and female-skewed corpora
individually returns the following topics.[^29]

  Girl Borrowers              
  ---------------- --------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  0                0.3571    face hand eyes back door voice head room looked moment turned hands stood cried words heard arm suddenly child
  1                0.40228   good thought make people made time mind knew looked felt thing asked talk things speak face girl suppose kind
  2                0.21032   eyes face looked beautiful pretty dress hair de girl room made girls flowers blue sweet beauty long bright lovely
  3                0.2317    men house long side water road back time day place horse night trees made stood light sea sun air
  4                0.20247   day letter read book time work chapter girls home school good life write things made paper books letters days
  5                0.1791    papa dear mamma father asked good mother children captain glad daughter returned time child answered replied love home ah
  6                0.29939   good thing cried make didn won back things time mother dear put asked isn give aunt wouldn home till
  7                0.36303   love heart father mother life god child thought words face poor woman world day long eyes loved lord years
  8                0.23685   time wife dolly men made father house years herr husband day family country captain replied left son present make
  9                0.24667   room night door morning bed house time day back table good mother sleep aunt window tea thought hour long
  Boy Borrowers              
  0                0.1915    boys good time back didn make thing uncle thought find replied boy put told money asked long made give
  1                0.0828    indian time indians deerfoot face made red camp back party long knew warrior warriors moment point hand make left
  2                0.14232   day night time long made good men camp fire country morning large trees village wild found people work water
  3                0.09665   captain ship deck vessel board men crew officer war boat steamer vessels time lieutenant schooner commander passford cabin officers
  4                0.20695   moment back head time side feet hand men stood heard eyes began door made looked face cried long thought
  5                0.09512   men general army troops guns fire enemy colonel force fort hundred soldiers battle officers time position attack charlie back
  6                0.05559   replied boat major father colonel engine added waddie time tommy wolf lake captain engineer steamer run make asked wimpleton
  7                0.01851   cloth illustrated series story boy book price life boys books volume adventures box chapter stories club full history gold
  8                0.0909    water island river boat shore time feet engineer made miles sea bank stream replied work day house long land
  9                0.2113    father time good boy day made mother home make life years asked house replied men captain people room friend

Table 3. 10-topic model of male-borrowed and female-borrowed books

The topic words generally point toward ships, wars, exploration, and the
frontier for boys, on the one hand, and family, appearance, emotional
life and domestic spaces for girls, on the other. One also finds,
however, a certain amount of overlap in the concern with familial life
(see "boy" topic 9), suggesting that at least some gender-normative
books might have been addressing convergent interests, even if the
appeal to those interests was packaged along gender-specific lines.

 

Gendered Juvenile Fiction in the Late Nineteenth Century {#gendered-juvenile-fiction-in-the-late-nineteenth-century style="text-align: center;"}
--------------------------------------------------------

The above results help to make visible the multiple self-reinforcing and
self-perpetuating influences that channeled books to or away from
children based on gender in late nineteenth-century America. By the
1890s the importance of reading, especially to the socialization of
children and adolescents, had long been professed and was virtually
uncontested in the United States. Moreover, the central role of what we
now term gender in the reading socialization of children and adolescents
of the era was then and is now obvious. "Boys literature of a sound
kind," Edward G. Salmon maintained in 1886 in "What Girls Read,"

> ought to build up men. Girls' literature ought to help to build up
> women. If in choosing the books that boys shall read it is necessary
> to remember that we are choosing mental food for the future chiefs of
> a great race, it is equally important not to forget in choosing books
> for girls that we are choosing mental food for the future wives and
> mothers of that race.[^30]

Such prescriptions for gendered reading were, moreover, variously
reinforced by the players in the "communication circuit."  As Sarah
Wadsworth outlines, in the 1860s, authors, supported by the publishing
industry began self-consciously to write gendered literature as opposed
to the putative "unisex" literature that had preceded it:

> Just as \[William T.\] Adams helped to define not only boys' series
> but also the audience for boys' books, so Alcott, as the most
> important contemporary American author to write books specifically for
> girls, was instrumental in defining, shaping, reinforcing, and
> revising the qualities, interests, and aspirations of the girls who
> comprised that market. [^31]

If readers had previously gravitated toward certain books in gendered
patterns, print culture now deliberately targeted the gender of juvenile
readers.

By the 1890s this gendered market was well established. One finds ample
evidence of it in publishers' lists of reading for boys, on the one
hand, and for girls, on the other; decorative covers that suggest the
intended adolescent audience; and authors who wrote for one gender or
the other, as often signaled by the book title itself.[^32] The covers
of books intended for boys frequently depict an active male figure or a
male figure with props that project future action; books for girls often
feature girls reading. The respective covers quite obviously suggest
that for boys the pleasure of reading is to identify with a male
protagonist, with "action figures"[---]{.emdash}often in the company of
other boys and men who play a role in that fiction. By contrast, for
girls the pleasure of reading is, according to many covers, the act of
reading itself, absorption, time alone and in one's own head, be it
indoors, by the seashore, or even among the leafy boughs of a tree (see
Figs. 2 and 3).  The contents of this girl reading remain unclear in
such cover art. One can in any case, reasonably assume that Muncie
borrowers over seventeen in 1895 had in the previous two decades been
exposed to such gender-specific literature in their childhood and
adolescence as were those patrons seventeen and under who checked out
books (1895-1902) in Muncie.

::: {#attachment_1295 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure_2_Boys_Covers.jpg)

Figure 2. Nineteenth-century covers of books by Horatio Alger and Harry
Castlemon.[^33]
:::

::: {#attachment_1296 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure_3_Girls_Covers.jpg)

Figure 3. Three covers of books targeting girls from the late nineteenth
century. [^34]
:::

As the transaction data and the text mining results outlined above
indicate, in the aggregate, gender-specific book borrowing in Muncie,
Indiana, occurs most frequently among young readers, and the books
borrowed by these readers, to a large degree, conform with contemporary
notions of gender-appropriate reading as simplistically modeled by the
divisions supported and constructed by the book market. Consideration of
crossover reading needs to be framed against this backdrop of powerful
forces mobilized against it. Such crossover reading did occur in Muncie,
however, with some frequency and among all groups of readers, as Joel
Shrock has recently demonstrated.[^35] Our further probing of these
transaction data helps to flesh out this complex story. As we shall
explain, while these data do supply evidence of gender-appropriate
reading in Muncie, they also reveal patterns of convergent and crossover
reading in various life phases that increase with advancing age. As
such, these data prompt questions about reading choices (and reading
tastes) as forms of subjectification, on the one hand, and
individualization, on the other, and about the texts themselves, i.e.,
about the contents, formal elements, and messages delivered by
gender-targeted books that potentially informed and supported both
processes *across* the gender divide they appear to uphold.[^36] They
also raise the question of reading context: how might the same text
"read" differently for those formed by early reading of largely
"masculine" books from the way it reads for those formed by early
reading of "feminine" books.  Might adult convergent reading comprise
texts containing a mix of elements that provide multiple points of entry
and attachment that cater to the divergent pre-formations of childhood
and young adult reading?

 

General Reading Trends in the Muncie Public Library[---]{.emdash}Second Pass {#general-reading-trends-in-the-muncie-public-librarysecond-pass style="text-align: center;"}
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Adolescent reading that breaks down along predictably gender-specific
lines, in other words, is hardly the whole story. While we can identify
powerful forces of subjectification driving reading choices, in
particular gender expectations, we also need to ask about patterns that
might indicate individuation.[^37] Even among adolescents, one finds a
subset of authors and individual books that are read with relative
frequency by both boys and girls, notwithstanding the obvious pressures
exerted on young readers in the period to separate reading by gender.
Establishing the parameters of this subset, however, demands careful
attention to shifts in library use among different age groups.

One of the key features of the Muncie borrowing data, but one whose
impact was not immediately clear to us, is the significant variation in
the total number of male and female borrowers at various ages, as can be
seen in figure 4.

::: {#attachment_1297 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure_4_Transactions.jpg)

Figure 4. Total male versus female transactions by age of borrower.
:::

While the numbers of transactions for patrons sixteen and younger are
significantly higher for boys than girls, the number of male
transactions decreases markedly beginning at age seventeen proportional
to female transactions, even as the number of transactions per life year
for both genders diminishes overall.[^38] The preponderance of boys
among younger borrowers means that, in order to identify crossover books
correctly for this group specifically, we need to rescale the raw
checkout percentages. Our scaling procedure has been heretofore based on
the average checkout percentages for all patrons (54% female and 46%
male). For patrons seventeen and under, however, that is, patrons likely
still in school (students who stayed in school usually graduated at age
seventeen in this period), the average percentages are 40% female and
60% male. Scaling the checkout numbers to reflect this new proportion
pushes some books that[---]{.emdash}in terms of raw
percentages[---]{.emdash}appear to be boys' books more towards the
middle of the rankings.

The transactions of borrowers seventeen and under separate into three
groups: two groups of titles that were checked out almost exclusively by
boys or girls and a third group that apparently appealed to both genders
as crossover or convergent reading. If we take the top quartile of
titles checked out by this age group, re-scale the percentage
distributions as described above (to account for the different aggregate
gender break-down among these younger borrowers), and then take all the
books in the first decile for each group of borrowers, we are left with
74 books that can be described as minimally skewed toward either male or
female borrowers.[^39] In this case as well, authors and titles prove
revealing. A number of Indiana authors, some of whom were also
bestsellers nationally, make it into this subset of books; these include
three titles by Edward Eggleston (1837-1902), Booth Tarkington's *A
Gentleman from Indiana* (1899), Lew Wallace's *Ben-Hur* (1880), and
Maurice Thompson's *Alice of Old Vincennes* (1900).[^40] Local authors,
in other words, constitute one focus of convergent reading. The same can
be said of "right reading," or those books that, in the words of the
editor of the popular late nineteenth-century guide *Best Reading* (1st
ed. 1872), "from their acknowledged literary merit, or from their value
in representing some important historical period, social movement, or
phase of thought, have come to be regarded as belonging to standard
literature."[^41] A disproportionate number of the minimally skewed
texts are in fact by authors who receive the highest rating in *Best
Reading*. Some of these works are by authors we would now consider
canonical, including Hawthorne, Dickens, Shakespeare, and Walter Scott,
whereas others (e.g., William Black, Thomas Hughes) received this
ranking for reasons that seem opaque in retrospect. Nonetheless, with
regard to the 74 minimally skewed titles under consideration, 36% (18)
of the 50 unique authors receive an "A" rating by *Best Reading*, as
opposed to fewer than 6 % of the authors of the girls' books (3 of 53)
and roughly 8% of the authors of the boys' books (3 of 36).

One author figures prominently in this third group but fits into neither
the category of regional reading nor that of "right reading": Horatio
Alger. The presence of his work in this subset of minimally skewed texts
might seem surprising. No fewer than 11 Alger titles belong to it,
despite the author's self-proclaimed writing of "boys' books."
Furthermore, 9 of these 11 titles rank among the top 20 overall in terms
of total transactions. In fact, among the other prolific and
high-profile children's authors mentioned, including Ellis, Castlemon,
and Adams (Optic) for boys and Finley, Coolidge and Meade for girls,
only books by Alger and Alcott appear in the subset of minimally skewed
titles. In Alcott's case, however, only one title, *Under the
Lilacs*,[^42] makes it into this group, suggesting that, among authors
writing for children and adolescents, Alger is unique in the Muncie
library in combining extreme popularity with regular crossover appeal.
While juvenile fiction by Castlemon and Finley, Adams and Alcott, Munroe
and Meade also logged high circulation numbers in Muncie, Alger's books
may have functioned differently in the reading socialization of Muncie
library users, namely, they may have anticipated, and even predisposed
their readers, toward a different kind of popular reading, i.e., a
certain kind of adult fiction whose popularity depended on the positive
preferences of both genders.

One indication of such a formation might be sought in the shift in the
relationship between popularity and gender-specific borrowing patterns.
If, focusing on the 10-17 age group, we remove the Alger titles and then
calculate the correlation between 1) the degree of gender-specific
borrowing and 2) the total number of transactions, the result is .122,
indicating a slight positive correlation between the popularity of a
book and the likelihood that it will be checked out predominantly by
either boys or girls. In the case of adults between the ages of 18 and
28, however, the correlation coefficient is -.235, suggesting the
opposite result; in other words, for adults the most popular books are
those with the greatest appeal to both groups of readers.[^43] This
negative correlation holds for Alger as well (-.176).

Alger's works, a brand unto themselves, were an enduring source of
controversy nationwide. Exhibiting an unmistakable moral-didactic
intention and touted by some as a hedge against still worse reading
choices, Alger's books fell, nevertheless, in the opinion of some
pundits, educators, and librarians, into the category of sensation
fiction, given their depiction of their upward-bound heroes' seamy
starting points on the streets among suspect company and the drastic
turns in their plots.[^44] The Muncie Public Library apparently harbored
no such concerns and in the years 1891-1902 stocked fifty-seven juvenile
books (fifty-one titles) by Alger, the first accessioned as early as
1875, the last in 1901. Most of the Alger volumes acquired on December
30, 1891, or later experienced 100 or more transactions during the years
1891-1902.

Digging more deeply into the transaction data, one finds that Alger's
popularity in Muncie surfaces on multiple levels. In terms of total
transactions, the borrowing of Alger exceeds that of any other author in
the library. In fact, in the aggregate, Alger remained during that
decade the top-circulating author in the library. The 8,965 check-outs
of his books surpass those of his closest competitor, Castlemon, by
1,566 transactions. 1,351 different patrons (180 more individuals than
for Castlemon) of the total 4,024 patrons checked out at least one book
by Alger. In the aggregate Alger transactions constitute 5 % of the
176,912 transactions recorded for the years 1891-1902, and multiple
Alger titles rank in the top twenty titles borrowed in these years. The
average number of loans of books by Alger per
patron[---]{.emdash}6.8[---]{.emdash}suggests a high degree of serial
reading of the author; in fact some patrons checked out 50 or more.[^45]
His books, written and packaged largely in series, were, after all,
formulaic and overtly promised readers more of the same, what had
presumably delighted them upon first reading. Some male readers in our
dataset continued checking out Alger's books well into adulthood and
even after they had otherwise turned to more complex reading featuring
more mature protagonists.

Boys' and men's unfailing and repeated reading from 1891-1902 of the
Harvard-educated and one-time minister Alger unquestionably plays a
critical role in his top ranking in the Muncie library. Indeed the
authors ranked in second, third, fifth, and eleventh place, also authors
of "boy" books (Castlemon, Optic, Ellis, and Henty respectively),
evidence the same serial and repetitious reading by male patrons.  The
interest of these patrons is not surprising. Overtly labeled as stories
for boys and intended by the author (by his own
declaration[---]{.emdash}"I leased my pen to the
boys"[^46][---]{.emdash}for male readers, Alger's nearly 100 juvenile
novels almost uniformly feature boy protagonists. Nineteenth-century
book covers underline the "masculinity" of the reading with images of
boys in action or of boys poised to take action, as in figure 5.

::: {#attachment_1298 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure_5_Alger_Covers.jpg)

Figure 5. Nineteenth-century covers of books by Horatio Alger.[^47]
:::

Girls too checked out Alger as crossover reading; indeed, neither the
statements of the author nor the paratextual gendering of the books
prevented Alger books from being borrowed by female patrons in
substantial numbers. When in fact Muncie checkouts are calculated by
life year and gender, Alger consistently ranks in the top ten authors
borrowed by female patrons, seventeen and under.[^48] Young women and
girls typically read Alger alongside Finley; Meade; Alcott; Coolidge;
Sidney; and, in Nina Baym's formulation,  "woman's fiction."[^49] Male
serial borrowing and re-borrowing in fact somewhat mask the fact of
female borrowing of Alger books.

For all the overt orientation of these books to boys, some publishers
and librarians did come to acknowledge that girls too read them. Charles
Cutter, for example, in 1878 grumpily referred to Alger's work as "not
very good company for well-educated boys and girls," thereby
acknowledging the possibility of a female Alger readership.[^50] By
circulating a series entitled "Horatio Alger's Books for Boys and Girls"
along side other Alger series late in the century, the publisher John C.
Winston Co. too eventually conceded a potential appeal to girls of
Alger's books for boys.

In the late twentieth century, Alger's phenomenal popularity in the
previous century prompted literary historians and critics, such as
Michael Moon and Glenn Hendler, to take a fresh look at his corpus in
ways that prove relevant to our own investigation.  Although they focus
on close textual analysis rather than reader choice, their work
questions the facile understanding of these books as merely about boys'
"luck and pluck," as their "rags-to-riches" stories. Especially Moon's
observations concerning the so-called success story for which Alger is
known suggests that Alger is not so removed from those popular genres
typically written for and read by women and girls.  These boys' stories,
Moon maintains, in some respects resemble domestic fiction. As he
observes,

> That Alger's books are not only homoerotic romances but also represent
> a genuine reformulation of popular domestic fiction is made evident by
> the regularity and narrative intensity with which the tales highlight
> the boy hero's moving from the street or from a transitional charity
> shelter into his own modest little home (usually a boardinghouse
> room).  That this transition is perhaps the most crucial in the boy's
> development is manifested in the elaborate care that Alger expends on
> discriminating the fine points of comparative domestic amenities at
> this point in his narratives.[^51]

Hendler similarly identifies an affinity in Alger's works to the tropes
and mechanisms of the domestic fiction most often aimed at women: "this
description of sympathy recalls the sympathetic identification valorized
above all in the women's sentimental novel, which entails a potentially
self-negating surrender to the emotions of a suffering heroine."[^52]
While some contemporaries regarded sympathetic identification as
potentially feminizing, Hendler contends, advice books represent the
bond between male readers and authors as "an affectively charged form of
homosocial companionship," with the book figuring as a responsive male
friend.[^53] Alger himself touted his boy heroes as "manly boys" and not
"goody-good boys," with whom the male reader could appropriately
identify.[^54]

::: {#attachment_1299 .image style="width: 520px"}
![](Figure_6_Alger_Boys_and_Girls.jpg)

Figure 6. Book cover for Alger's books, ca. 1896. [^55]
:::

VII. Understanding Alger's Appeal {#vii.-understanding-algers-appeal style="text-align: center;"}
---------------------------------

Moon considers Alger's works in isolation and with an eye toward a
broadly conceived critique of ideology, but his focus on domesticity
also provides a starting point for identifying Alger's position within
the constellation of authors who make up the nineteenth-century juvenile
corpus. Additional quantitative analysis offers one avenue for
developing an adequately relational understanding of his
distinctiveness, that is to say, an understanding based on how his works
differ from those of other popular authors in the late nineteenth
century. Using an electronic corpus of 48 of the 51 Alger novels
available at the library, we re-ran the LIWC analysis described
previously in order to get a sense of the features that Alger shares
with both the "boys'" and the "girls'" books. Plotting a series of
distributions for each corpus for each of the variables measured by LIWC
enables us to gain a rough sense of where the Alger books overlap with
or are distinct from the other two corpora under consideration. In the
visualizations below, the x-axis indicates the score for a particular
LIWC variable, and the y-axis indicates the frequency density for a
given x-value. The curves show the distribution of texts for each of the
three corpora using the kdeplot function from the seaborn library, which
follows the rule of thumb developed by D. W. Scott to determine a
reasonable bandwidth for the distribution.

As evidence for the general plausibility of this approach, we first
present two distributions that indicate Alger's uniqueness in areas for
which he has long been known: work and a focus on the future.

::: {#attachment_1300 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure_7.jpg)

Figure 7. Frequency density distribution of three corpora for LIWC
categories "Work" and "Focus on the Future."
:::

In both cases, the distribution for the Alger novels departs from those
for the other corpora, with frequency densities shifted significantly
toward higher scores for the variables under consideration.

Results for some of the other variables, however, suggest a different
way in which Alger stands apart, namely in his inclusion of elements
characteristic of one or the other of our comparison corpora. In the
case of the categories of "risk" (words such as "danger" and "doubt")
and "achievement" (e.g., "win," "success," "better"), the Alger
distribution parallels that of the boy corpus quite closely, whereas it
departs from the girl corpus.

::: {#attachment_1301 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure_8.jpg)

Figure 8. Frequency density distribution of three corpora for LIWC
categories "Risk" and "Achievement."
:::

In certain respects, then, Alger's texts have much in common with those
of other high-profile authors for boys. In the case of the "social"
(e.g., "mate," "talk," "they") and "family" (e.g., "daughter," "dad,"
"aunt") variables, however, the Alger corpus is much more closely
aligned with the girl corpus.[^56]

::: {#attachment_1302 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure_9.jpg)

Figure 9. Frequency density distribution of three corpora for LIWC
categories "Social" and "Family".
:::

Any analysis based on the LIWC dictionaries paints with a broad brush;
nonetheless, these results, when combined with the evidence from the
circulation data, prompt reconsideration of Moon's claims regarding
Alger's "reformulation of domestic fiction."

According to Moon, "Alger's writing provides a program cast in
moralistic and didactic terms for maximizing a narrow but powerfully
appealing range of specifically male pleasures."[^57] Moon makes a
compelling case for understanding Alger's success in terms of the
ideological function of his novels, the way they resolve potential
threats to "the smooth unfolding in the America of the time of the
exclusively male homosocial institutions of corporate capitalism."[^58]
Reading Moon's finely grained analysis against the backdrop of the
aggregate data, however, also enables us to acquire a richer sense of
how Alger novels position themselves vis-à-vis other popular texts from
the period. By providing a comparison of the contents of Alger's books
with a range of books by other authors for children and adolescents, we
can link their success to the particular position Alger occupied in the
literary field of the time.

Alger was indeed a wildly successful author at the end of the century,
but so were Castlemon, Adams, Finley, and Coolidge. Unlike these
authors, however, Alger was, as documented by the Muncie data, popular
with both boy and girl readers. It is hard to disagree with Moon's claim
about Alger's "powerfully appealing range of specifically male
pleasures," but the circulation data indicate that his novels also
engendered pleasures that resonated with girl readers. Moreover, our
content analysis suggests that he represented these pleasures and
created reading pleasure through a compelling fusion of individual
elements typically separated out into books intended to appeal largely
to one gender or the other.

This crossover popularity raises the possibility that Alger's books,
notwithstanding their specific ideological function with regard to
nineteenth-century capitalism, also tapped into fundamental sources of
appeal with implications for reading socialization over the long term,
in particular for boys who otherwise checked out books not typically
favored by girls. As we have seen, the most popular adult reading in
Muncie tends, with some exceptions, to consist of books checked out
frequently by both men and women in large proportion to their respective
reader groups.[^59] In what ways might avid reading of Alger among
adolescents be related to avid reading in Muncie of such
turn-of-the-century bestsellers as *Red Pottage* (1899), *Richard
Carvel* (1899), *The Redemption of David Corson* (1900), *When
Knighthood was in Flower* (1898), *Alice of Old Vincennes* (1900), and
*The Virginian* (1902), all of which flew off the Muncie library shelves
in the year of their acquisition?

 

Alger and the Bestsellers in Muncie, 1895-1902 {#alger-and-the-bestsellers-in-muncie-1895-1902 style="text-align: center;"}
----------------------------------------------

In the years 1895-1902, as it began to appeal more to adult readers, the
Muncie Library reliably acquired identified bestsellers, and most of
these sparked immediate interest among patrons. *Red Pottage*, first
acquired on March 13, 1900 (a second copy was added on November 18,
1901), was, for example, checked out 110 times from March 13 through
November 25, 1902, that is, on average 5.5 times a month.  The library
acquired four copies of the best-selling *The Redemption of David
Corson* (1900) in 1900, in the very year of its first publication.  Over
the course of the following two years and four months, 244 patrons
borrowed the book 259 times. Moreover, Marie Corelli's best-selling *The
Sorrows of Satan* (1895; available in two copies and first acquired on
August 12, 1897), which was checked out 342 times over roughly five
years, ranks No. 10 of all titles checked out over the entire period
(1891-1902).[^60] The nine titles ahead of it are all juvenile fiction.
96 of these 342 transactions are by patrons in the age group 18-85 who
are identified as female. At 96 transactions, Corelli's book thus ranks
as the highest circulating novel recorded for women overall in this age
group. 54 transactions are by men in the same age group, making *The
Sorrows of Satan* the number one novel checked out by all men in this
age group. What, then, might reading Alger have to do with reading such
bestsellers?

Alger died in 1899, writing to the end but having completed most of his
juvenile fiction by 1893 and earlier, indeed, most of it much earlier.
The fifty-one titles held in the Muncie Library first appeared, starting
with the serialization of *Ragged Dick* in 1867, in the years 1867-1899,
the vast majority of them between1867 and 1889.  While read by children
and adolescents in Muncie in the 1890s they most certainly also provided
the stuff of the early reading of the very adults who in the years
1895-1902 were borrowing bestsellers. The library had, after all, held
some of Alger's books since at least 1875.  Alger circulated in Muncie,
that is, not as new bestselling titles of the 1890s, but as long-term
trendsetters and possible precursors of adult convergent reading.

One way to gain a better sense of how Alger might have been setting the
stage for later reading by both genders is to identify those LIWC
categories in which his books most closely approximate the average
scores of popular adult novels. To this end, we compiled a corpus of 105
late nineteenth-century "bestsellers" that were also checked out
regularly by patrons of the Muncie Library. We started with the ten
top-selling novels recorded each year by *Publishers Weekly* for the
years 1895-1902.[^61] Since the Muncie Library did not actually acquire
all of these novels within these years and since there was some overlap
from year to year in the bestsellers, this first attempt to compile a
corpus yielded only 62 viable titles. We then sought to expand our list
of newly published nationally best-selling works circulating frequently
in Muncie by digging deeper into contemporary lists of bestsellers. We
therefore combed the monthly records for book sales recorded in *The
Bookman*, January 1895-August 1902, vols. 1-15. From January 1895 to
September 1897, *Bookman* listed bestsellers month by month in the form
of an Eastern letter from New York and a Western letter from
Chicago[---]{.emdash}for our purposes we took note of the lists of
best-selling books provided in the Western letter. Beginning in October
1897, the journal changed its format and instead listed six bestsellers
each month based on data gleaned nationwide. After compiling a master
list and eliminating the many duplications, we then cross-checked the
titles actually held against our subset of frequently circulating books
in the Muncie collection and proceeded to capture all the texts readily
available online, that is, 105 texts in all.[^62]

Upon re-running our frequency density curves, now with four corpora
(boys, girls, Alger, and bestsellers) rather than three, we detected
some suggestive patterns. Taken as a whole, it should be noted, the
results indicate a diverse range of similarities and differences across
various groupings. In two closely related instances, however, namely
with regard to the category of words denoting "social processes" as well
as the category of  "personal pronouns," the Alger books, the girls'
books, and the bestsellers all have a notably higher average frequency
of dictionary terms than the boys' books. These two categories are
closely related inasmuch as personal pronouns comprise a large
percentage of the words included in the "social processes" dictionary;
in other words, the former is more or less a subset of the latter.

::: {#attachment_1303 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure_10.jpg)

Figure 10. Frequency density distribution of four corpora for LIWC
categories "Social" and "Personal Prounouns".
:::

We are of course dealing with a complex set of relationships among
multiple samples here, such that any simple binary claims regarding
Alger and the bestsellers would be problematic. These graphs, however,
do permit the hypothesis that girls' serial fiction and Alger place an
emphasis on the kind of human interaction that is also characteristic of
adult bestsellers but less so of other boys' serial fiction, especially
if we take explicit pronoun references to human beings ("it" is not
included in these numbers) as a proxy for this interaction. The specific
nature of this human interaction emerges if we consider how the
divergence is driven by individual personal pronouns. The boxplots below
indicate the range of values for each of the four corpora for the entire
"personal pronouns" category and also for the individual pronoun forms
"I," "you," "we," "they," and "she/he."

[![](Figure_11a_i_you_plot.jpg "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Figure_11a_i_you_plot.jpg"){.wp-image-1304
.aligncenter width="640" height="568"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Figure_11a_i_you_plot.jpg 1856w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Figure_11a_i_you_plot-300x266.jpg 300w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Figure_11a_i_you_plot-768x681.jpg 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Figure_11a_i_you_plot-1024x908.jpg 1024w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/figure_11a_i_you_plot/)

::: {#attachment_1305 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](Figure_11b_we_they.jpg)

Figure 11. Boxplots indicating range of scores for each of the four
corpora for personal pronouns. The y-axis indicates the prevalence of
the feature as a percentage of total words.
:::

If we take the boy corpus as our baseline, we see that in every single
case the Alger, girl, and bestseller corpora trend in the same direction
as one another and away from the boy corpus. We also see that in the
case of "I," "you," "she/he," these three corpora have significantly
higher medians than the boy corpus, whereas in the case of "we" and
"they" they have significantly lower medians.[^63] These data suggest
differently figured social worlds. Boy books trend toward social worlds
conceived in terms of a collective first-person "we" and a collective
third-person "they," whereas the three other corpora share higher
relative frequencies of the singular "I," "she/he," as well as the
dialogic "you," thus favoring one-on-one exchanges and individualized
actors.  In this respect, Alger's books, in their representation of
intimate social interaction as captured by the high relative frequency
of "I" and "you" skew boys' preferred reading away from the rest of the
boy books and toward the mixed pleasures of bestsellers shared by both
genders.

 

In Lieu of a Conclusion {#in-lieu-of-a-conclusion style="text-align: center;"}
-----------------------

In *The Bestseller Code: Anatomy of the Blockbuster Novel*, Jodie Archer
and Matthew L. Jockers assert that "topic transcends genre" with regard
to the likelihood of a given novel becoming a bestseller.[^64] Their
computational model, they claim, unfailingly and correctly identified as
bestsellers novels as generically different from one another as those by
Danielle Steel and John Grisham from among several thousand contemporary
authors. On the surface of it, the works of these two best-selling
authors have little in common; these novels do, however share
significantly in the topic Archer and Jockers believe to be the best
predictor of success with contemporary American readers, namely the
theme of  "human closeness and human connection."[^65] As they
elaborate, "Scenes that display this most important indicator of
bestselling are all about people communicating in moments of shared
intimacy, shared chemistry, and shared bonds."[^66]

The relative frequencies of personal pronouns in our four corpora may
point to a similar conclusion with regard to shared reading preferences
across gender among adults in late nineteenth-century Muncie. A closer
look at five diverse bestselling novels from the top-circulating novels
in Muncie among both genders[---]{.emdash}*The Gentleman from Indiana*,
*David Harum*, *Richard Carvel*, *The Prisoner of Zenda*, and
*Eleanor*[---]{.emdash}shall serve here to parse the significance of
these pronoun frequencies.  All of these novels, though differently told
and belonging to different genres, are heavy on friendship, include a
romance plot (though not necessarily as the central plot), and feature
the protagonist's conflict with a particular nemesis, indeed, consist of
one-on-one interactions of many kinds[---]{.emdash}in the aggregate,
they include close up and personal encounters from sword fights in
*Richard Carvel* to intense conversations between a would-be writer and
his most important female interlocutor in *Eleanor*.  They depict a
social world articulated by relations between individuals, identified as
"I" and "you" and "he" and "she" and not by groups, labeled  "we" or
"they."  Their heavy reliance on dialogue between individuals is but one
of their many methods of constructing and conveying "human closeness and
human connection." An episode in *The Gentleman from Indiana* with the
Whitecaps, a Ku Klux Klan-like group in a neighboring town, on the other
hand, constitutes a rare exception among these five books, when a town
is pitted against a neighboring town, becoming a "we" in conflict with
an undifferentiated "they."

Character relations are similarly plotted in Alger's high-circulating
novels, such as *Ragged Dick*, *Mark the Matchboy*, *Strive and
Succeed*, and *The Train Boy*. These works consist strikingly of
dialogue between individuals in the process of bonding with or swindling
one another.  Alger's stories of connections between a boy and a series
of men and between a boy and another boy, like the plots of the
bestsellers, proceed by connecting the hero to others, one by one,
through the dialogue between an "I" and a "you."  They repeatedly figure
their boy protagonist as, in Moon's words, "that exceptional,
'deserving,' 'attractive' underclass youth who defies his statistical
fate," the one boy who is discovered by those who dispose over wealth
and power.[^67] While Moon goes on to offer a political reading of these
homosocial bonds, we here highlight them instead as anticipating the
themes of human closeness and contact that fuel the bestsellers that
male and female adults read in late nineteenth-century Muncie.  Like the
bestsellers, Alger's texts remain consistently concerned with affective,
close relationships between individuals[---]{.emdash}both friends and
enemies.

It is of course certainly not the case that "boy books," which, after
all, also numbered among the most popular books in Muncie, completely
lack human closeness and connection.  Yet the tallies of the relative
frequency of personal pronoun suggest a different sort of social world,
one articulated corporately and communally through "we" and "they,"
where the boy hero's action is situated within a group to which he
belongs and where conflict is likely to arise not from confrontation
with a single nemesis but with an entire group. Castlemon's *Frank on a
Gunboat*, the sixth-most circulating book in Muncie, one
disproportionately preferred by boys, is a case in point.  This novel
commences with our hero's decision to join the Union cause in the Civil
War and concludes with his return home to his family. When Frank joins
up, he boards a so-called receiving-ship along with other boy recruits
"where they were speedily examined and sworn in . . . and, when they
were rigged out in their blue shirts and wide pants, they made
fine-looking sailors."[^68] Castlemon's second-most popular book in
Muncie, also heavily preferred by boys, *George at the Fort; or, Life
among the Soldier*s (1882) promises from the outset a similar
orientation and indeed on the first page we read of a "they," a group of
deserters that must be apprehended. Unlike such boy books, which favored
group identity and action, Algers' books for boys rely on individualized
human intimacy that apparently was palatable to boys who also read
Castlemon and other authors like him and also to girls who were already
accustomed to such fare[---]{.emdash}though in other
guises[---]{.emdash}in the books they selected. In so doing Alger
perhaps delivered to his boy readers the mainstream reading pleasures of
adult men and women in Muncie that awaited them should they choose to
continue reading fiction in adulthood.

 

 
:::
:::

[^1]: The following participants in the summer fellowship program in the
    Humanities Digital Workshop provided valuable assistance during
    various phases of the research process: Tomek Cebrat, Kaitlin Cruz,
    Kristine Helbling, and Bethany Morgan. Keegan Hughes,
    post-baccalaureate fellow in the HDW, created a series of
    visualizations that helped to clarify the gender distribution of
    borrowers. Cindy Traub helped with the creation of the box plots
    included in the final section of the essay.

[^2]: Carlo Ginzburg, *The Cheese and the Worms: The Cosmos of a
    Sixteenth-Century Miller* (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
    Press, 1992), 31; Hans Robert Jauss, "Literary History as Challenge
    to Literary Theory," New Literary History 2. no. 1 (Autumn, 1970):
    13; Stanley Fish, *Is there a Text in this Class: The Authority of
    Interpretive Communities* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
    1982), *passim*; Janice Radway, "Reading is not eating:
    Mass-produced literature and the theoretical, methodological, and
    political consequences of a metaphor," *Book Research Quarterly* 2,
    no. 3 (1986): 7-29.

[^3]: Tony Bennett, "Texts, Readers, Reading Formations," *Bulletin of
    the Midwest Modern Language Association* 16, no. 1 (1983): 8.

[^4]: Tony Bennett, "Texts in History: The Determinations of Readings
    and Their Texts," *Reception Study: From Literary Theory to Cultural
    Studies,* edited by James L. Machor and Philip Goldstein (New York:
    Routledge, 2001), 66.

[^5]: For a discussion of predictive models of genre, see Ted Underwood,
    "The Life Cycles of Genres," *Journal of Cultural Analytics*,
    accessed 6/23/17, doi: <https://doi.org/10.22148/16.005>.

[^6]: One recent example is Allison Layfield, "Asian American Literature
    and Reading Formations," *reception* 7 (2015): 64-82.

[^7]: *What Middletown Read*, Center for Middletown Studies, Ball State
    University, <http://www.bsu.edu/libraries/wmr/>. The *What
    Middletown Read* database is normalized to avoid data duplication
    during data collection, per best practices. However, because the
    normalized database structure impedes ad hoc queries, we
    denormalized, or "flattened", the data into one table, each row of
    which contains all the information for a checkout transaction. After
    we denormalized the data, we performed several additional
    transformations. We removed 1,650 transactions for which it was not
    possible, because of errors in the original paper records, to
    identify the book being circulated. We flagged some transactions as
    not having census data. We also flagged transactions where it is
    likely that the census data, which is connected to the holder of the
    library card, does not represent the actual borrower (see "Anomalies
    -'Borrowed Cards'" at <http://www.bsu.edu/libraries/wmr/help.php>).
    Finally, for each transaction, we computed the borrower's age at the
    time of checkout by subtracting his or her year of birth (the census
    does not provide full date of birth) from the year in which the
    checkout occurred. The *What Middletown Read* data is an
    extraordinarily thoughtful and carefully curated set of data, and we
    are grateful for the work done at Ball State University to collect
    the data and share them with us. Our transformation of the data in
    no way implies any criticism. Instead, it reflects a desire to
    structure them so they becomes tractable for our particular
    purposes, and to interpret demographic data as carefully as
    possible.

[^8]: Relevant discussions of boys and girls reading in nineteenth
    century can be found in Gillian Avery, *Behold the Child: American
    Children and their Books, 1621-1912* (London: Bodley Head, 1994);
    Anne Scott MacLeod, *American Childhood: Essays on Children's
    Literature of the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries* (Athens, GA:
    University of Georgia Press, 1994); Sarah Wadsworth, "Louise May
    Alcott, William T. Adams and the Rise of Gender-Specific Series
    Books," *The Lion and the Unicorn: A Critical Journal of Children's
    Literature* 25, no. 1 (January 2001): 17-46; Claudia Nelson,
    "Children's Fiction," in *The Oxford History of the Novel in
    English,* edited by John Kunich and Jenny Bourne Taylor (Oxford:
    Oxford University Press, 2012), 3:154-68; and Joel Shrock, \"Alger,
    Fosdick, and Stratemeyer in the Heartland: Crossover Reading in
    Muncie, Indiana, 1891-1902, in *Print Culture Histories beyond the
    Metropolis*, edited by James J. Connolly Patrick Collier, Frank
    Felsenstein, Kenneth R. Hall, and Robert G. Hall (Toronto:
    University of Toronto Press, 2016), 284-303.

[^9]: For a discussion of this shift in the market, see Wadsworth,
    "Gender-Specific Series Books," esp. 22-26. Wadsworth notes that
    publishers first recognized boys as a niche market in need of a
    "separate body of literature"; girls were belatedly discovered as a
    separate audience (25-26).

[^10]: While girls' reading of books in Harry Castlemon's Frank series
    exemplifies crossover reading, the avid reading by both genders in
    Muncie of Marie Corelli's best-selling *The Sorrows of Satan* (1895)
    by men and women presents a case of convergent reading.

[^11]: On the social roles of the public library, see Christine Pawley,
    *Reading on the Middle Border: The Culture of Print in
    Late-Nineteenth-Century Osage, Iowa* (Amherst: University of
    Massachusetts Press, 2001), esp. 34; Dee Garrison, *Apostles of
    Culture: The Public Librarian and American Society, 1876-1920* (New
    York: The Free Press, 1979), esp. 36; and Wayne A. Wiegand, *Main
    Street Public Library: Community Places and Reading Spaces in the
    Rural Heartland, 1876-1956* (Iowa City: University of Iowa Press,
    2011), esp. 186.

[^12]: According to *The* *Chicago Evening Post*[---]{.emdash}as but one
    of many examples of the widespread objection to
    fiction[---]{.emdash}nine-tenths of the books borrowed from
    libraries "consisted of 'stories' . . . leading not only to
    'profitless devouring of trash, but a mental and moral enervation, a
    distaste for real study and serious reading." Such reading, the
    article maintained, resulted in a "library habit of reading," a
    "superficial, careless, nonappropriate skipping habit that
    incapacitates the mind for assimilating and digesting what it
    reads." Quoted in Pawley, *Middle Border*, 61. Scholarly discussions
    of the alleged dangers of fiction for nineteenth-century readers are
    widespread and have been the subject of numerous studies. For one
    recent overview, see Deborah Wynne, "Readers and Reading Practices,"
    in *The Oxford History of the Novel in English,* 22-36.

[^13]: Garrison, *Apostles of Culture*, 91; *Catalog of "A.L.A."
    Library: 5000 Volumes for a Popular Library Selected by the American
    Library Association and Shown at the World's Columbian Exposition*
    (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1892), vii.

[^14]: Quoted in Garrison, *The Apostles of Culture*, 89.

[^15]: Fred B. Perkins, "What to Read," in *Hints for Home Reading. A
    Series of Chapters on Books and Their Use*, edited by Charles Dudley
    Warner et al. (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1880), 26.

[^16]: Frank Felsenstein and James J. Connolly, *What Middletown Read:
    Print Culture in an American Small City* (Amherst: University of
    Massachusetts Press, 2015), 107.

[^17]: Felsenstein and Connolly, *What Middletown Read*, 103.

[^18]: Felsenstein and Connolly, *What Middletown Read*, 105.

[^19]: The catalog recommends many titles of entertaining books,
    middlebrow fiction, some of it quite recent, such as Arthur Conan
    Doyle's *Adventures of Sherlock Holmes* (1992), William Dean
    Howells' *Foregone Conclusion* (1892), and Frederick Marryat's
    *Jacob Faithful* (1890), as well as classic reading, such as the
    works of Jane Austen, Henry Fielding, Oliver Goldsmith, Thomas
    Hardy, and Nathanael Hawthorne and selected works by Balzac, Goethe,
    and George Sand. It also lists some juvenile fiction, such as Sophie
    May's Dottie Dimple stories, Mary Mapes Dodge's *Hans Brinker; or,
    The Silver Skates*, and Frances Hodgson Burnett's *Little Lord
    Fauntleroy* (1892). Translated internationally popular fiction, by
    such authors as Berthold Auerbach, Georg Ebers, E. Werner, E.
    Marlitt, Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson, and François Fénelon, likewise
    appears on the list.

[^20]: For a detailed description of the library, its setting, and its
    users, see Felsenstein and Connolly, *What Middletown Read.* The gap
    in the data results in part from the closure of the library during a
    smallpox epidemic in 1893 and probably from further measures taken
    in the interest of public health.  As the Muncie team theorizes*,*
    the library likely "destroyed records kept in ledgers that were in
    use during the early stages of the epidemic, which included recorded
    transactions that stretched back to the previous year. There was
    also a period of time after the reopening of the library when books
    may not have circulated, which explains why the records of borrowing
    only resume later in 1894." James Connolly, e-mail message to Lynne
    Tatlock, November 26, 2017.

[^21]: Our use of the terms "sex" here as well as "male" and "female"
    elsewhere is a function of the census categories with which we are
    working and is not intended to imply any claims about the essential
    characteristics of those readers who are designated by these
    categories.

[^22]: While the database identifies the borrower, it does not tell us
    1) whether the book was actually read and 2) who and how many people
    actually read it while it was checked out. There are certain to be
    instances of family members checking out a book for another family
    member. Nevertheless, the fact that borrowers could only select a
    single book at a time, that multiple family members had library
    cards, and that clear patterns of book selection show up in
    individual readers' transaction history over longer stretches of
    time suggests a degree of reliability, that is, that the book
    selections do by and large represent the choices of the individuals
    checking them out. The data in any case far surpass in number the
    anecdotal information about nineteenth-century reading to which we
    otherwise have access and complement textual and paratextual
    information as to implied and intended readers.

[^23]: For the first attempts to think about these data with the tools
    created in the Humanities Digital Workshop, see Lynne Tatlock,
    "Romance in the Province: Reading German Novels in Middletown, USA,"
    in *Print Culture Beyond the Metropolis*, edited by James J.
    Connolly, Patrick Collier, Frank Felsensten, Kenneth R. Hall, and
    Robert G. Hall (Toronto: Toronto University Press, 2016), 304-330
    and \"The One and the Many: *The Old Mam'selle's Secret* and the
    American Traffic in German Fiction (1868-1917),\" in *Distant
    Readings: Topologies of German Culture in the Long Nineteenth
    Century*, edited by Matt Erlin and Lynne Tatlock (Rochester, NY:
    Camden House, 2014), 229-56. The graph instanced here stems from
    data newly  cleaned in the summer of 2016.

[^24]: An interactive version can be found
    [here](https://talus.artsci.wustl.edu/ageGenderCharts_Revised/examples/muncieAuthors.html). Created
    by Stephen Pentecost, Washington University in St. Louis.

[^25]: Although a smaller number of titles accounts for a higher
    percentage of male transactions, it is also the case that, when
    measured across all 3,797 titles rather than just the top quartile,
    the total number of unique titles borrowed by men and boys is
    greater than it is for women.

[^26]: More information on LIWC, including the names of all of the
    dimensions measured, can be found
    [here](https://liwc.wpengine.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/LIWC2015_LanguageManual.pdf).

[^27]: The Mann-Whitney U test ascribes an integer ranking for each LIWC
    category to each text in the combined boy/girl corpus. The girlboy
    stat statistic (the "U" statistic\") calculates for each girl book
    the number of boy books it outranks and then sums all of those
    counts. If each of the 88 girl books ranked higher than each of the
    69 boy books, this number would be equal 88 \* 69 = 6,072. The
    girlboy rho statistic is calculated by dividing the U statistic by
    this maximum to get a consistently scaled number between 0 and 1.
    Scores closer to 1, indicate that the category is distinctive of the
    girl books, scores closer to 0, that it is distinctive of the boy
    books.

[^28]: LIWC is by no means flawless, but it proves effective for this
    type of analysis, especially since the vocabulary in these novels is
    straightforward, which is to say that a high percentage of the words
    in the novels appear in the LIWC dictionaries.

[^29]: For the topic modeling, we divided the novels into 500-word
    chunks, dropped all words that occurred in fewer than two percent of
    the novels and also applied a curated stopword list. We used Mallet
    defaults for alpha and number of iterations and set the "interval"
    and "burn in" at 10.

[^30]: Quoted in Wadsworth, "Gender-Specific Series Books," 27. For
    Salmon's original article, see Edward G. Salmon, "What Girls Read,"
    *Nineteenth Century* 20 (October 1886): 515-29.

[^31]: Wadsworth, "Gender-Specific Series Books," 19.

[^32]: As Pawley observes in her important study of the Sage Public
    Library, "in the late nineteenth century, commercial publishers
    assumed that men and women liked different types of books and
    targeted publications toward these putative gendered needs. Cultural
    authorities held that gender differences in reading (and writing)
    were normal and natural. . . . Toward the end of the nineteenth
    century, age was also assuming the characteristic of a 'natural'
    basis for differentiation." In the 1880s and 1890s, moreover, some
    publications displayed both an awareness of gender and a more
    prescriptive designation of what constituted "children's" books.
    Pawley, however, also asserts that borrowing patterns do not conform
    with strict differentiation in book choices. Pawley, *Reading on the
    Middle Border*, 105-6.

[^33]: Harry Castlemon, [Frank the Young
    Naturalist](http://www.abebooks.com/servlet/BookDetailsPL?bi=3123208826&searchurl=kn%3DFrank%252C%2Bthe%2Byoung%2Bnaturalist%26bi%3Dh%26sortby%3D17%26pics%3Don)
    (Philadelphia.: John C. Winston Co., n.d.); Harry Castlemon, [Frank
    on a
    Gunboat](http://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?an=Castlemon&n=100121503&pics=on&sortby=17&tn=Frank+on+a+gunboat)
    (Philadelphia: John C. Winston Co., 1892); Horatio Alger, Jr.,
    [Ragged
    Dick](https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=nc01.ark:/13960/t6058k331;view=1up;seq=9;size=50)
    (Boston: Loring, 1868).

[^34]: W. Heimburg, [*Gertrude's
    Marriage*](http://talus.artsci.wustl.edu/germanromance/books/M022/)
    (Chicago: Donohue Brothers, n.d.); W. Heimburg,
    [*Misjudged*](http://talus.artsci.wustl.edu/germanromance/books/M027/)(Chicago,
    M. A. Donohue and Company, n.d.);  E. Marlitt, [*Princess of the
    Moor*](http://talus.artsci.wustl.edu/germanromance/books/M094/)(New
    York: Hurst and Company, n.d.).

[^35]: Joel Shrock, "Alger, Fosdick, and Stratemeyer."

[^36]: In using the terms "subjectification" and "individualization," we
    follow the lead of the historian Ute Frevert in her studies of the
    history of emotions.  Ute Frevert, "Defining Emotions: Concepts and
    Debates over Three Centuries," ch. 1 of *Emotional Lexicons:
    Continuity and Change in the Vocabulary of Feeling 1700-2000*,
    edited by Ute Frevert (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014), 5.

[^37]: Whereas Shrock addresses crossover reading as a general
    phenomenon across authors, age groups, and class affiliations, we
    seek to identify those specific authors and categories of books that
    proved *most* likely to be checked out by readers of both genders.
    By combining a consideration of authors as well as individual texts
    and by using basic text-mining tools, we can gain a better sense of
    which particular features of a book made it more likely to appeal to
    a wide range of readers. Our approach also highlights the fact that
    the crossover appeal of different books by a single author often
    varied substantially. See Shrock, "Alger, Fosdick, and Stratemeyer,"
    esp. 291-96.

[^38]: The data for numbers of borrowers (as opposed to transactions)
    exhibit a parallel pattern, with the small difference that the
    number of male borrowers drops below the number of female borrowers
    at age 18 rather than age 17.

[^39]: As before, we eliminated periodicals and non-authored works and
    took only titles whose total number of checkouts were in the top
    quartile, which was 15 or above in this case. These reductions left
    us with 729 titles and 30,518 total transactions. This younger group
    of borrowers is dominated by boys by a ratio of roughly 3:2, that
    is, of the 30,518 non-periodical transactions, 18,238 can be
    attributed to boys, as opposed to 12,280 for girls.

[^40]: The period between 1880 and 1920 has come to be known as [the
    "Golden Age" of Indiana
    Literature](http://www.indianahistory.org/our-services/local-history-services/traveling-exhibits/the-golden-age-indiana-literature-1880-1920#.V-fwr2UXR3U).
    Indiana was not merely the setting of some of these best-selling
    novels or the point of origin of their authors, but also the
    location of Bowen-Merrill, a press that published a number of the
    best-selling novels in the years 1895-1902.

[^41]: *The Best Reading:* *Hints on the Selection of Books; on the
    Formation of Libraries, Public and Private, on Courses of Reading,
    etc.* (New York: Putnam and Sons, 1872), 84-85.

[^42]: Alcott's novel couples girlish heroines who are first seen
    playing with dolls with a boy run away from the circus, providing
    points of entry across markers of gender division.

[^43]: We chose the range 18-28 to mitigate the effect of patrons as
    parents borrowing books for their children.

[^44]: For a sampling of views on Alger in the public library, see "Who
    Should Read Alger? Alger and the Public Library," in Horatio Alger,
    Jr., *Ragged Dick*, *or, Street Life in New York with Boot Blacks*,
    edited by Hildegard Hoeller (New York: W. W. Norton & Company,
    2008), 157-63. His books do make it on to some of the *Best Reading*
    lists under the category "Young People's Books" but are given the
    grade of "b."

[^45]: These numbers are taken from our edited version of the Muncie
    database. They thus differ slightly from those provided on the
    Muncie website. See \"[Data Summaries: Top Twenty
    Books.](http://www.bsu/edu/libraries/wmr/reports.php?report=top_books)\"
    What Middletown Read.

[^46]: Quoted in Gary Scharnhorst, *Horatio Alger, Jr.* (Boston: Twayne
    Publishers, 1980), 33.

[^47]: Horatio Alger, Jr., [Slow and Sure or, From the Street to the
    Shop](https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=mdp.39015081451943;view=1up;seq=11)
    (New York: Street & Smith, 1902); Horatio Alger, Jr., [Strive and
    Succeed](//babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=mdp.39076002449168;view=1up;seq=1)
    (New York : A.L. Burt, \[18--\]); Horatio Alger, Jr., [The Errand
    Boy or, How Phil Brent Won
    Success](https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=nc01.ark:/13960/t6349ns0b;view=1up;seq=1)
    (New York : A.L.Burt, 1888).

[^48]: See also Shrock, "Alger, Fosdick, and Stratemeyer," 292.

[^49]: Nina Baym, *Woman's Fiction: A Guide to Novels by and about Women
    in America, 1820-1870* (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1978).

[^50]: Charles C. Cutter, "The Public Library, and Its Choice of Books,"
    *Boston Advertiser* (February 12, 1878), reprinted in Alger, *Ragged
    Dick*, 157.

[^51]: Michael Moon, "'The Gentle Boy from the Dangerous Classes':
    Pederasty, Domesticity, and Capitalism in Horatio Alger,"
    *Representations* (Summer 1897): 87-110; reprinted in Alger, *Ragged
    Dick*, 209-33, here 221.

[^52]: Glenn Hendler, "Pandering in the Public Sphere: Masculinity and
    the Market in Horatio Alger," *American Quarterly* 48, no. 3 (1996):
    415-38; reprinted in Alger,  *Ragged Dick*, 233-54, here 247.

[^53]: Hendler, "Pandering in the Public Sphere," 248.

[^54]: Hendler, "Pandering in the Public Sphere," 247-48.

[^55]: Horatio Alger, Jr., [*Frank Hunter's
    Peril*](https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=hvd.32044013670559;view=1up;seq=6)
    (Philadelphia: The John C. Winston Co. \[1896?\].

[^56]: The LIWC dictionaries include subordinate and superordinate
    categories. For example, "perceptual processes" (436 words),
    "biological processes" (748 words), and "social processes" (756
    words) are all higher-level categories. "Home" (100 words) is
    categorized as a subset of "personal concerns." The latter category
    differs from "perceptual processes," "biological processes," and
    social processes,\" however, in that LIWC does not calculate an
    aggregate score.

[^57]: Moon, "The Gentle Boy," 211.

[^58]: Moon, "The Gentle Boy," 231.

[^59]: The correlation calculation in section VI provides evidence of
    this phenomenon.

[^60]: "Data Summaries: Top 20 Circulating Books," *What Middletown
    Read*, www.bsu/edu/libraries/wmr/reports.php?report=top\_books.

[^61]: These bestselling titles are summarized in Daniel S. Burt, ed.,
    *Chronology of American Literature: America's Literary Achievements
    from the Colonial Era to Modern Times* (Boston: Houghton Mifflin
    Company, 2004), 289, 299.

[^62]: Frequently circulating books are those checked out at least 39
    times, which minimum number represents the top quartile in terms of
    borrowing frequency, as described at the beginning of section IV.

[^63]: 

[^64]: Jodie Archer and Matthew L. Jockers, *The Bestseller Code:
    Anatomy of the Blockbuster Novel* (New York: St. Martin's Press,
    2016), 51.

[^65]: Archer and Jockers, *The Bestseller Code*, 67.

[^66]: Archer and Jockers, *The Bestseller Code*, 76.

[^67]: Moon, "The Gentle Boy," 233.

[^68]: Harry Castlemon, *Frank on a Gunboat* (Cincinnati: R. W. Carroll
    & Co., 1869), 14.
