---
author: Amelia Acker and Tanya Clement
date: '04.10.19'
shortauthor: Amelia Acker and Tanya Clement
shorttitle: 'Data Cultures, Culture as Data -- Special Issue of Cultural Analytics'
title: 'Data Cultures, Culture as Data -- Special Issue of Cultural Analytics'
---

::: {.entry .print-only}
::: {#post-2283 .post-2283 .post .type-post .status-publish .format-standard .has-post-thumbnail .hentry .category-articles}
###### *Clusters: [Data](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/01/data/),[Infrastructure](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/11/infrastructure/)*

###### *Article DOI: [10.22148/16.035](http://doi.org/10.22148/16.035)*

###### *PDF DOI: [10.31235/osf.io/975g2](https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/975g2)*

###### *Journal ISSN: 2371-4549*

###### *Cite: Amelia Acker and Tanya Clement, "Data Cultures, Culture as Data - Special Issue of Cultural Analytics," Journal of Cultural Analytics. April 10, 2019. DOI: [10.31235/osf.io/975g2](https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/975g2).*

 

Data have become pervasive in research in the humanities and the social
sciences. New areas, objects, and situations for study have developed;
and new methods for working with data are shepherded by new
epistemologies and (potential) paradigm shifts. But data didn't just
happen to us. We have happened to data. In every field, scholars are
drawing boundaries between data and humans as if making meaning with
data is innocent work. But these boundaries are never innocent.
Questions are emerging about the relationships of culture to
data[---]{.emdash}urgent questions that focus on the codification (or
code-ification) of social and cultural bias and the erosion of human
agency, subjectivity, and identity.

For this special issue of *Cultural Analytics *we invited submissions to
respond to these concerns as they relate to the proximity and distance
between the creation of data and its collection; the nature of data as
object or content; modes and contexts of data circulation, dissemination
and preservation; histories and imaginary data futures; data expertise;
data and technological progressivism; the cultivation and
standardization of data; and the cultures, communities, and
consciousness of data production. The contributions we received ranged
in type from research or theory articles to data reviews and opinion
pieces responding to the theme of "data cultures". Each contribution
asks questions we should all be asking: What is the role we play in the
data cultures/culture as data we form around sociomaterial practices?
How can we better understand how these practices effect, and affect, the
materialization of subjects, objects, and the relations between them?
How can we engage our data culture(s) in practical, critical, and
generative ways? As Karen Barad writes, "We are responsible for the
world in which we live not because it is an arbitrary construction of
our choosing, but because it is sedimented out of particular practices
that we have a role in shaping."[^1]Ultimately, our contributors are
focused on this central concern: where is our agency in the
responsibility of shaping data cultures? What role can scholarship play
in better understanding our culture as data?

What is a data culture? {#what-is-a-data-culture style="text-align: center;"}
=======================

According to information philosophers, "data are relata." That is, all
data are related, indexical, built up, organized, named, understood in
relationship to other data, things, phenomena, or human processes in the
world. But as the following contributions show, data is often
characterized as a natural resource out in the wild to be discovered and
sourced, with all the requisite taming of nature, including the
frontierism metaphors of cowboys, lumberjacks, and gold rush miners. For
most formal definitions of information, information cannot *be*without
data.[^2]In fact, for some information scientists, there can be no
data-less information.[^3]The problem with defining information with
data related to other data illustrates the difficulty that scholars have
in apprehending the concept of data itself, in its apparent ubiquity and
seeming ahistorical nature. But we know that data is not just given, it
is taken up by people and given forms, standards, names, putting it into
relationships with cultural practices.[^4]Data is not nature, waiting to
be tamed; it is always already a cultural product.[^5]

Yet, shouldn't we distinguish between data and 'data culture'? In their
critical study on mobile dating and hook-up apps, Albury et al. define
data cultures through four lenses: cultures of production; the
cultivation of data; datafication; and cultures of use.[^6]Here we
propose a fifth avenue for scholars researching critical and empirical
aspects of the impact of data infrastructures[---]{.emdash}as
collections of data. While many efforts at critical data studies have
begun with the historical significance, origins and stabilization of the
definition of data (or how it becomes data), works in this special issue
instead focus on data cultures or cultures as data, with a particular
focus on the becoming of cultures of data. Understanding data cultures
as underwritten by collections of data (as relata) means understanding
data cultures as phenomenon shaped by ideas about the cultivation and
production of data that reflect epistemologies about, for example,
ordering, classification, and standards. Like an underpainting, data is
an initial layer, a starting point against which the authors look at the
cultures that have been painted in the background of data collecting and
collections. Seeing collections of data as they shape and are shaped by
human life, perspectives, and experience, these authors provide
alternative histories as well as possible futures for the cultures that
develop in these sociotechnical landscapes.

Always a part of culture, data's contemporary position is undeniable. We
are in a new "era of data" with sensor networks and 5^th^generation
mobile networks, as personal computing devices and internet saturation
become tighter and tighter in our homes, institutions, and public
spaces. Now we are all data subjects as collections of data assemblages
have become broader in reach and precision.[^7]Data about
ourselves[---]{.emdash}our selves[---]{.emdash}are collected, organized,
archived and preserved for use and reuse in our daily lives. While 'big
data' and algorithmic technologies continue to be the central focus of
social sciences,[^8]feminist Science and Technology Studies,[^9]and
digital media research,[^10]the epistemic impact of data cultures as
data collections remains understudied and under-theorized.

The history and development of how we became data subjects in cultures
of data are just now beginning to be told by historians and
sociologists.[^11]Like many of the pieces include in this special issue,
this literature begins to interpret the meaning and impact of data
collections, datafication and cultivation as a legitimizing tactic of
expertise, professionalism, or technological proficiency or civic
participation. Many of these cultures of expertise are built upon data
collections and data sets built with data infrastructures from the
contemporary moment and the recent past, revealing legacy errors and
what counts as worthy of counting.

This special issue of *Cultural Analytics *confronts the emergence of
data cultures through data collections, how they are addressed,
investigated, analyzed, and interpreted. In particular each piece takes
different approaches on questions of what can be called data, relied
upon as data, and the new kinds of cultural analysis that can be applied
to public, private, and historical data collections, both digital and
analog. The contributions include articles, opinion pieces, and critical
data reviews that interpret data and assess datafication and the making
of data culture and cultures of data. Pieces in this special issue draw
on a wide range of areas of study and expertise including information
science, media studies, STS, libraries and archives. Collections of data
are defining and defined by cultures [---]{.emdash}ranging from systems
of trust,[^12]relationships to information communication technologies
and self representation,[^13]even what it means to authentically
participate in public discourse or be human.[^14]All of the pieces
articulate data cultures and the impact of datafication on our lives,
but some central themes for better understanding data cultures have
emerged across all the pieces including a closer look at the social and
institutional infrastructures of data practices, data agency. and
alternate imaginaries of data histories.

The Social and Institutional Infrastructures of Data Practices {#the-social-and-institutional-infrastructures-of-data-practices style="text-align: center;"}
==============================================================

Many of the pieces included in this special issue discuss the social
structures and institutions being built around data reduction and
production or the ability to identify and reduce the analog world to
points of data for measurement, analysis, dissemination, and
preservation. Despite the incommensurability and the resistance to
quantification, even the most banal things are rendered as data through
data practices that include collecting and measuring uploads and
downloads, attitudes or degrees of attentions ("likes"), and tone on
public, online forums; panhandling and vagrancy; and the presence of
objects and buildings such as public art works and art centers. In her
study of feminist data futures and the quantification of care, Amelia
Abreu has written about how data work is so common in domestic life:

> it is a working practice - perhaps even a common art. Everyday data
> consumption is, I would argue, the most common and largest
> proportional working data relationship in existence. Like caring,
> cooking and cleaning, the task of managing data is something you'll
> see at work in every household. It starts with money and food, the
> most banal avenues for data-working.[^15]

Likewise, our contributors theorize about what's at stake for those
things that cannot be quantified, measured, standardized and captured
about human life (such as gender identity or kinship), but they are also
deeply concerned with what can be rendered as visible data work and what
remains as invisible labor.

Critical studies of data culture and their infrastructures reveal that
some data ontologies render some phenomena visible while making other
forms of human experience invisible.[^16]Increasingly, in efforts to
"datify" everyday human behaviors from menstruating to learning how to
read, we experience the seams and limits of those ontologies. Indeed,
many experiences of datafication bring to the fore what it means to be
an authentic human, when those elisions are located, revealed, and don't
fit in the contributions included here, we see new methods of critique,
reflection, and authenticity in the glitch that resists datafication. As
all kinds of behavior become datafied in support of data collections to
support institutions (in markets, decisions, public good, or posterity)
we see the solidification and enrollment of authority through efforts of
collection. The efforts of collection perform a sleight of hand. That
is, we recognize the institutionalization of public data as it becomes
known, read, and put in context, but in comparison, how private data is
secured, (almost assuredly) sold to data brokers and possibly eventually
leaked is obscured. Our contributors combat this deception by
demonstrating critical methods that analyze and interpret the power of
data collecting contexts and the trend towards a segmentation of
cultures that ignore outliers and group individuals.

Data Agency {#data-agency style="text-align: center;"}
===========

If there is one new thing to our 'era of data' and its collections, it
is the unprecedented access and the expectation to access to public
data, research data, historical and scholarly data. While the
limitations to access to these data collections may be lower, the stakes
are higher for critical scholars of data because of the interpolation
and collectivization of data subjects into collections that tend to
group culture into clean buckets and segments of interest. Creators'
agency over data that has been created, collected, and managed is thus
central to understanding the datafication of culture. Indeed, calls for
agency over our individual data footprints and practices of collection
exist, but more methods for understanding how individuals are
interpolated through sociomaterial practices of data collection as
subjects are still needed.[^17]Our contributors ask: How can we better
understand how these practices effect, and affect, the materialization
of subjects, objects, and the relations between them? How can we engage
our data culture(s) in practical, critical, and generative ways? Opinion
pieces discuss the power of asserting and attributing agency within
collecting pasts, presents, and futures. As such, these articles are
situated in the space that the journal wishes to impact, particularly
new research methods, voices, and topics.

Alternate Data Histories and Future Imaginaries {#alternate-data-histories-and-future-imaginaries style="text-align: center;"}
===============================================

"Mathematically, visually, and narratively," Donna Haraway writes, "it
matters which figures figure figures, which systems systematize
systems."[^18]Haraway reminds us to focus on process because it matters
what matters and how it matters. This focus on process is not new to
histories about Digital Humanities. Indeed, a concern with the process
of knowledge production is an essential aspect of originary stories in
DH including those surrounding Father Busa and his index of St. Thomas
Aquinas, an oft-touted "first" DH project. Detailing one of Busa's early
presentations to a crowd of IBM employees, religions leaders, and
humanities academics, Steven Jones describes a presentation that was
less about the product of an analysis of Aquinas and more about the
analysis itself:

The emphasis on repeated testing, hand-drawn flow charts, experimental
punching and handling of punch cards, on the spot, as part of the
process, and indeed on discovering and demonstrating the precise nature
of the materiality of the technology involved at every turn - in all of
these ways, rather than just as a focus on classical texts, the demo of
1952 established certain practices of humanities computing for the half
century to follow, practices that have become even more important for
today's digital humanities.[^19]

We cite this quote extensively to show that the work of everyday work,
the banal nature of what we do to make what matters, is the matter at
hand here too. The pieces in this issue are describing the history of
the seemingly banal work done to select, curate, process, disseminate,
and preserve data collections for the same reason we cite the history of
great men (and women): to see from whence we've come, to foresee where
we are going, and to consider where we could have gone and why we did
not arrive just there.

At the same time, analyzing process entails trying to pinpoint a moving
target or taking a cup of water from a stream. We take that sample and
we can say something about it and its point in time, but how do we
attest for the movement? How do we distinguish between the shape of
water moving across time and space and the shape of the cup in which we
hold it? The present is the only line we can draw between history and
the future. Less about the object of data than the process of data,
these pieces included here are concerned with present cultures of data
that have pasts and portend futures. They are concerned with discovering
and uncovering assumptions about data that cultures of discourse use to
obfuscate the work of data, and they are concerned with how these
obfuscations alter the potentialities of different futures and
imaginaries. These authors tell us what matters now may or may not
matter in the future, but they are also asking, quite pointedly, who's
to say?  That is, what of our own agency in that future? Karen Barad
notes that once we understand that "the world and its possibilities for
becoming are remade in each meeting," then we are to ask: "How then
shall we understand our role in helping constitute who and what come to
matter?" These authors, in their attempt to better understand data in
time and over time, are just a few ways to understand the process of
what matters, but their inquiries serve as a collective call to come in:
the water is swift and sure but there are endless entry points along the
bank.

Conclusion {#conclusion style="text-align: center;"}
==========

This issue imagines different, alternate, and complementary futures not
only for data and the study of data but for the *Journal of Cultural
Analytics*. The authors who have submitted to this special issue all
work with and think about data and they have arrived here from
disciplines (History, Information Studies, Science and Technology
Studies, Communication and Media Studies) and work places (government
and the libraries) that have not often been represented in the journal
thus far. Our intention with this special issue is to facilitate the
crossing of the boundaries of the data cultures that have been presented
here. With this special issue, we are staking some claims for the
imagined data landscape that this issue portends, where the
interrogation of metaphors and cultural imaginaries are important; where
the processes for normalizing, transforming, and naming data are at the
forefront of investigations; where institutions built on reductive or
simplistic assumptions about data are under scrutiny; where new methods
that break down these metaphors, processes, and collections contexts
lead to new theories.

** **
:::
:::

[^1]: "Getting Real: Technoscientific Practices and the Materialization
    of Reality," differences: A Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies,
    June 22, 1998, 102.

[^2]: Luciano Floridi, \"[Semantic Conceptions of
    Information](https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2017/entries/information-semantic/),\"
    in *The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*, ed. Edward N. Zalta,
    Spring 2017 (Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2017).

[^3]: Donald O. Case, *Looking for Information: A Survey of Research on
    Information Seeking, Needs, and Behavior: 4th Edition*, ed. Lisa M.
    Given, 4th New edition edition (Bingley, UK: Emerald Group
    Publishing Limited, 2016).

[^4]: Johanna Drucker, "Humanities Approaches to Graphical Display,"
    *Digital Humanities Quarterly*005, no. 1 (March 10, 2011); Geoffrey
    C. Bowker et al., *"Raw Data" Is an Oxymoron*, ed. Lisa Gitelman
    (Cambridge, Massachusetts ; London, England: The MIT Press, 2013).

[^5]: Sherry B. Ortner, "Is Female to Male as Nature Is to Culture?,"
    *Feminist Studies *1, no. 2 (1972): 5-31,
    <https://doi.org/10.2307/3177638>.

[^6]: Kath Albury et al., "Data Cultures of Mobile Dating and Hook-up
    Apps: Emerging Issues for Critical Social Science Research," *Big
    Data & Society *4, no. 2 (December 1, 2017): 2,
    <https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951717720950>.

[^7]: Rob Kitchin and Tracey Lauriault, \"[Towards Critical Data
    Studies: Charting and Unpacking Data Assemblages and Their
    Work](https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2474112),\" SSRN Scholarly
    Paper (Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network, July 30,
    2014).

[^8]: Christine L. Borgman, *Big Data, Little Data, No Data: Scholarship
    in the Networked World *(Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press,
    2015); Borgman.

[^9]: Elizabeth Losh, "Selfies\| Feminism Reads Big Data: 'Social
    Physics,' Atomism, and Selfiecity," *International Journal of
    Communication *9, no. 0 (May 15, 2015): 13; Koen Leurs, "Feminist
    Data Studies: Using Digital Methods for Ethical, Reflexive and
    Situated Socio-Cultural Research," *Feminist Review *115, no. 1
    (March 1, 2017): 130-54,
    <https://doi.org/10.1057/s41305-017-0043-1>; Rosemary Lucy Hill,
    Helen Kennedy, and Ysabel Gerrard, "Visualizing Junk: Big Data
    Visualizations and the Need for Feminist Data Studies," *Journal of
    Communication Inquiry *40, no. 4 (October 1, 2016): 331-50,
    <https://doi.org/10.1177/0196859916666041>.

[^10]: Jose van Dijck, "Datafication, Dataism and Dataveillance: Big
    Data between Scientific Paradigm and Ideology," *Surveillance &
    Society*12, no. 2 (May 9, 2014): 197-208,
    <https://doi.org/10.24908/ss.v12i2.4776>; danah boyd and Kate
    Crawford, \"[Six Provocations for Big
    Data](http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1926431),\"
    *SSRN ELibrary*, September 21, 2011; Bernie Hogan, "The Presentation
    of Self in the Age of Social Media: Distinguishing Performances and
    Exhibitions Online," *Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society *30,
    no. 6 (December 1, 2010): 377-86,
    <https://doi.org/10.1177/0270467610385893>.

[^11]: For example, see recent special issues themes such as data
    shadows, political histories of technoscience, and the history of
    data: Sabina Leonelli, Brian Rappert, and Gail Davies, "Data
    Shadows: Knowledge, Openness, and Absence," *Science, Technology, &
    Human Values *42, no. 2 (March 1, 2017): 191-202,
    <https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243916687039>; \"[Political Histories
    of Technoscience \| Radical History
    Review](https://www.radicalhistoryreview.org/features/technoscience-modernity-and-the-state/),\"
    accessed January 31, 2019; Soraya de Chadarevian and Theodore M.
    Porter, "Introduction: Scrutinizing the Data World," *HIST STUD NAT
    SCI *48, no. 5 (November 1, 2018): 549-56,
    <https://doi.org/10.1525/hsns.2018.48.5.549>.

[^12]: Helen Nissenbaum, \"[Contextual Integrity Up and Down the Data
    Food
    Chain](http://www7.tau.ac.il/ojs/index.php/til/article/view/1614),\"
    *Theoretical Inquiries in Law *20, no. 1 (January 23, 2019).

[^13]: Lee Humphreys, *The Qualified Self: Social Media and the
    Accounting of Everyday Life*, 2018.

[^14]: van Dijck, "Datafication, Dataism and Dataveillance"; José van
    Dijck, Thomas Poell, and Martijn de Waal, *The Platform Society:
    Public Values in a Connective World *(Oxford University Press,
    2018).

[^15]: \"[Quantify Everything: A Dream of a Feminist Data Future by
    Amelia Abreu \| Model View
    Culture](https://modelviewculture.com/pieces/quantify-everything-a-dream-of-a-feminist-data-future),\"
    Model View Culture, February 14, 2014.

[^16]: Geoffrey C. Bowker and Susan Leigh Star, *Sorting Things Out:
    Classification and Its Consequences*, 1st ed. (The MIT Press, 1999).

[^17]: Helen Kennedy, Thomas Poell, and Jose van Dijck, "Data and
    Agency," *Big Data & Society *2, no. 2 (December 1, 2015):
    2053951715621569, <https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951715621569>.

[^18]: "Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Plantationocene, Chthulucene: Making
    Kin," *Environmental Humanities *6, no. 1 (May 1, 2015): 160,
    <https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919-3615934>.

[^19]: *Roberto Busa, S. J., and the Emergence of Humanities Computing :
    The Priest and the Punched Cards *(Routledge, 2016), 96,
    <https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315643618>.
