---
author: Niels Kerssens
date: '05.16.19'
shortauthor: Niels Kerssens
shorttitle: 'De-Agentializing Data Practices'
title: |
    De-Agentializing Data Practices: The Shifting Power of Metaphor in 1990s
    Discourses on Data Mining
---

::: {.entry .print-only}
::: {#post-2320 .post-2320 .post .type-post .status-publish .format-standard .has-post-thumbnail .hentry .category-articles}
###### *Peer-Reviewed By: Anon.*

###### *Clusters: [Data](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/01/data/)*

###### *Article DOI: [10.22148/16.037](http://doi.org/10.22148/16.037)*

###### **PDF DOI:**[*10.31235/osf.io/z2ejm*](https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/z2ejm)

###### *Journal ISSN: 2371-4549*

###### *Cite: Niels Kerssens, "De-Agentializing Data Practices: The Shifting Power of Metaphor in 1990s Discourses on Data Mining,"* *Journal of Cultural Analytics. May 16, 2019. DOI:*[*10.31235/osf.io/z2ejm*](https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/z2ejm)

 

**Introduction: data mining as extraction of natural resources ** {#introduction-data-mining-as-extraction-of-natural-resources style="text-align:center"}
-----------------------------------------------------------------

> Big Data represents a tremendous opportunity to drill down and tap
> into these critical insights. In fact, the powerful potential to mine
> and refine this vital, valuable resource points to a direct comparison
> to a similarly vital resource in the modern economy: crude oil.[^1]

> Meanwhile, artificial-intelligence (AI) techniques such as machine
> learning extract more value from data.[^2]

> The current generation of AI startups recognize this difference and
> apply machine learning models to extract value from the data they
> collect.[^3]

> Like oil, for those who see Data's fundamental value and learn to
> extract and use it there will be huge rewards.[^4]

How do metaphor-driven representations of data mining in corporate media
discourse affect understandings of data and data practices? This is, in
short, the focal question of this article. Current media discourses of
"Big Data" are characterized by a high degree of metaphorization[^5]and
these metaphors play a key role in how we (mis)understand this
ill-defined phenomenon. For example, media scholars Cornelius Puschman
and Jean Burgess argue that associated metaphors of big data as *a force
of nature to be controlled *and a form of *nourishment/fuel to be
consumed* lead to a deceptive understanding of big data in terms of
natural phenomena. These metaphors are misleading, they argue, as by
evoking the image of big data as a force of nature their value is
presented as a naturally given, while the fact that value and meaning
are actually inscribed by analysis is obscured.[^6]This article aims to
further deconstruct the representational politics of big data metaphors,
directing specific attention to changes in the
discursive[---]{.emdash}specifically metaphorical[---]{.emdash}framing
of data practices in the 1990s, comparing academic discourses with
corporate media discourses.

The *data mining is the extraction of natural resources*metaphor first
emerged as a dominant figure in the 1990s. Nonetheless, it continues to
shape popular understandings of data practices due to its pervasive
presence in today's corporate media discourses on Big Data and data
analytics, as evidenced by the excerpts presented above. In current
discourse, the metaphor evokes a concept of value production in big data
as analogous to the extraction of oil, or other natural resources, from
the earthly deposits that contain and conceal them. The metaphor
contains the associated metaphor of *big data as natural resource, *more
specifically 'the oil of the information economy,'[^7]which is equally
pervasive in today's corporate media discourses on big
data[---]{.emdash}often employed to portray its financial importance.
Spread wide in business-oriented data discourses, these associated
metaphors play a key role in the conceptualization of data practices and
data analytics, thus shaping experiences and understandings of big data
in the corporate context. For that matter, these are metaphors that the
corporate world of big data 'computes by', to borrow Marianne van den
Boomen's[^8]rephrasing of the well-known expression by metaphor scholars
Lakoff and Johnson.[^9]They provide a frame of meaning for corporate
data practices, steering the attention of the business world to a
perception of valuable information (e.g. business insights) as some kind
of inherent property of data, just as oil already contains an economic
value even when still locked between layers of rock deep within the
earth. But however tempting this metaphor may be, data is not oil and
data analytics is not a process of extracting it.

Although ubiquitous in current media discourse, the metaphor is far from
new. It first emerged in the 1990s when business organizations in the
United States and elsewhere started using database technologies and data
mining algorithms to convert large amounts of digital data collected
during the 1970s and 1980s into valuable business insights. These
database technologies developed from work in the academic field of
research that emerged under the name *Knowledge Discovery in Databases*
(KDD) in the late 1980s and early 1990s. When American business
organizations started using data mining systems, the American technology
press reported extensively on the new phenomenon, despite its extremely
complex technological nature[---]{.emdash}one that easily evaded
apprehension of journalists. To make the seemingly incomprehensible
nature of data mining understandable to a public of management
executives, and to communicate its potential corporate benefits,
journalists drew on the language associated with natural resource
extraction. Data was discussed as the new gold, and its 'mining' as a
process of natural resource extraction.

The metaphor of *data mining as the extraction of natural resources, *I
argue, played a central role in the misrepresentation of data mining in
1990s corporate media discourse. It discursively shaped a now common yet
false perception of value production in big data as natural,
intermediary and unbiased process by cancelling out any concept of the
agential role of technologies and humans contributing to the production
of value and meaning from data. Such misrepresentations of big data and
data mining still play an important role in the legitimation of these
practices, supporting the unquestioned integration and implementation of
data analytics in the worlds of business, science and public governance,
especially in current times of abundant media hype arguing the financial
benefits of 'Big Data'.[^10]For that matter, such misleading accounts of
the nature of data and its analyses, such as those that de-agentialize
data analytics, pose a threat to the critical agency of all
professionals[---]{.emdash}in business, academia,
government[---]{.emdash}currently involved in data and algorithm-driven
knowledge production. By attending to changes in the
discursive[---]{.emdash}specifically metaphorical[---]{.emdash}framing
of data practices in the 1990s, comparing academic KDD discourse with
corporate media discourses, this article traces a significant shift in
the meaning-making power of the data mining metaphor. In doing so, it
aims to open up debate concerning more truthful representations and
conceptualizations of data practices, which can form the starting point
for a more thoughtful acceptance and implementation of big data in any
domain[---]{.emdash}whether business, science, or government.

The analytical section starts with examining the role of the *data
mining *metaphor as conceptualization device in the academic discourse
of KDD. I will do so through the analysis of (metaphorical) discourse on
data mining in academic books and articles that formed foundational
publications for this emerging field of research into knowledge
discovery. All of these sources were published between the late 1980s
and early 1990s. To examine the role of metaphorical language in
corporate media discourse, I use examples from American news items
published in popular technology journals[^11]that formed part of the
trade press of the emerging data analytics industry in the 1990s, such
as *Byte*, *Datamation*, *Infoworld*, and *Informationweek*.[^12]All
news items contain references to data mining and were published in the
United States between 1992 and 1997.[^13]

These two analytical sections reflect the historical character of this
research with which it attempts to meet recent calls urging researchers
to start thinking historically, more specifically, genealogically, about
big data[^14]and deconstruct the assumed newness of the big data
phenomenon by bridging the gap between (critical) data studies and the
history of computing.[^15]But first I will specify the analytical frame
of this research in two interrelated sections. In the first I will
discuss how and why I approach data and data mining as concepts that are
discursively constructed. In the second section I discuss how I study
metaphor as a conceptualization device that, to a greater or lesser
extent, discursively shaped the meaning of data mining in the 1990s.

 

**Treating data mining as a concept** {#treating-data-mining-as-a-concept style="text-align:center"}
-------------------------------------

Within existing literature about (big) data and algorithms there have
been several moves towards criticizing notions of these phenomena as
objective and unbiased. Some have stressed how 'raw' or' pure' data
doesn't exist as the production of data is always preceded by an
'interpretative base' enabling data to be envisioned and imagined as
data.[^16]Others have emphasized the hidden biases in big data that lead
to false senses of accuracy[^17]and how biases in the process of data
creation lead to bias in the database itself.[^18]Yet critical media
scholars have directed particular attention to algorithms, studying
power relations deployed and expressed by computational
processes.[^19]Some have already started to investigate such powers by
deconstructing the history of contemporary data practices, machine
learning techniques (e.g. Bayes classifier; neural networks; vector
machine; decision trees; linear regression; k-means clustering) and
operations (e.g. vectorization; optimization; probabilization; pattern
recognition).[^20]

Driven by either such historical or more empirical methodologies, media
scholars increasingly debunk assumptions of objectivity that have
historically been associated with algorithms, instead foregrounding
their non-neutral, partial, biased, and subjective nature, and how this
affects the knowledge they help produce, and the decision-making
processes in which they are involved. For example, in his book *The
Black Box Society* (2015) Frank Pasquale explicitly argues for the
importance of looking beyond the data by placing research emphasis on
the role algorithms play in the operationalization of data. As Pasquale
points out, the guiding and organizing role of algorithms is central
from the perspective that 'critical decisions are made not on the basis
of the data per se, but on the basis of data analyzed
algorithmically'.[^21]

While in this current scholarly discussion of big data and algorithms
concerns are primarily directed to the power that algorithmic
technologies exert over our lives,[^22]this study directs attention to
the power of the 'discourse surrounding algorithms'.[^23]This means I
will direct analytical focus to the *concept* of data
mining*[---]{.emdash}*and the metaphor as conceptualizing
device*[---]{.emdash}*instead of data mining methods, techniques, and
technologies themselves.[^24]Recently, David Beer has argued for the
importance of research studying how the conceptualization of big
data[^25]and algorithms takes place.[^26]As Beer put it, '\[w\]e need to
look beyond the algorithms themselves, to explore how the concept of the
algorithm is also an important feature of their potential
power'.[^27]With this, Beer places research focus on understanding how
'notion\[s\] of the algorithm' take shape in 'the discourse surrounding
algorithmic processes'.[^28]He emphasizes in particular the importance
of research into the way in which these discourses about algorithmic
processes play a role in perpetuating and legitimizing particular
rationalities and ideologies that 'promote certain values and forms of
calculative objectivity',[^29]or what media scholar José van Dijck
refers to as 'dataism'.[^30]

In a similar way, media scholar Rob Kitchin emphasizes the role of
corporate discourse in producing a business rationale of big data that
legitimates its widespread adoption by promoting a narrative of
managerial and financial benefits[---]{.emdash}more effective and
efficient business management and leveraging idle data resources.[^31]In
doing so, such corporate discourses, as Couldry and Yu argue, neutralize
data practices by treating data as 'as if they were "natural", part of
"nature"' thus making them 'distinctively immune from
critique'.[^32]This research deconstructs the most powerful discursive
mechanisms shaping corporate and public perceptions of data mining
through a historical perspective that traces a discursive shift, more
specifically, a shift in the meaning-making power of the data mining
metaphor in the 1990s, when corporate media discourses started treating
data mining as if analogous to natural resource extraction.

 

**Studying metaphor as a discursive framing device in discourses on data mining** {#studying-metaphor-as-a-discursive-framing-device-in-discourses-on-data-mining style="text-align:center"}
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

While this research follows Beer and treats data mining as a concept, it
studies the degree to which metaphor framed its conceptualization. This
study draws on some of the insights from metaphor theory and critical
discourse analysis (CDA) to examine metaphors as representational
instruments[---]{.emdash}as discursive framing devices driving the
conceptualization of data mining in discourses about data practices of
the 1990s. Here I follow new media scholar Marianne van den Boomen who
argues that metaphors are fundamental to how we conceptualize and
understand computational processes and practices in
particular.[^33]Because technically complex and highly abstract,
understanding a computational phenomena such as data mining is
facilitated by the conceptualizing power of metaphor to turn this
unknown into a known. Metaphor, as van den Boomen states, is a
'meaning-making machine' that doesn't so much represent, but constitutes
and transforms the technological objects and processes it aims to render
intelligible.[^34]Although other discursive framing devices
exist,[^35]metaphors appear as salient in corporate and popular
discourse on big data and data mining, something that already started
more than twenty years ago. For that reason, the study of these
metaphors is important for understanding how, and by what kinds of
politics, they transform the abstract and complex nature of
computational processes into understandable practices that have meaning
and value for the corporate world.

To study changes in the meaning-making power of the *data
mining *metaphor in 1990s academic and corporate media discourses on
data practices, the article draws upon the concept of 'discourse
metaphor'.[^36]Zinken, Hellsten en Nerlich define a discourse metaphor
as 'a relatively stable metaphorical projection that functions as a key
framing device within a particular discourse over a certain period of
time'.[^37]In the study of these metaphors particular attention is
directed at media discourses and how metaphors frame a topic or debate
in the service of particular rationales 'through the features and
constraints they impose'.[^38]Within critical discourse analysis
attention is directed at how metaphors in media discourse are both
strategically and subconsciously chosen by powerful actors including
journalists, business people, and politicians to purposefully highlight
certain aspects of a media phenomenon, whilst downplaying others. I will
draw upon the concept of discourse metaphor to substantiate a change to
the extent to which the *data mining as extraction of natural resources*
metaphor shaped the meaning of data practices in corporate media
discourse, compared to earlier KDD discourse.

To study such conceptualization in more detail, I draw on the theory of
conceptual (or cognitive) metaphor, such as first extensively discussed
by Lakoff and Johnson.[^39]Work in the field of cognitive linguistics
focuses on metaphorical conceptualization as a cognitive process, often
through a detailed linguistics-based analyses of metaphor structure and
operation. Such an approach is not the intention here. For this study
the theory of conceptual metaphor provides an analytical lens for
examining how metaphor conceptualizes data mining in academic and media
discourses. Central to the theory is the assumption that 'the essence of
metaphor is understanding and experiencing one kind of thing in terms of
another'.[^40]This other is often a more familiar concept that can serve
as an explanatory bridge for making sense of a more abstract concept.
The familiar concept is known as the 'source domain', and metaphor is
understood as the transference of meaning from this known domain to what
is termed a 'target domain'. In discourse, the explanatory power of
metaphors 'rests in the fact that the familiarity of the ''known''
\[source\] domain (e.g. the extraction of natural resources) can offer
initial guidance to investigate and to plumb the ''unknown'' \[target\]
domain\" (e.g. data- and algorithm driven knowledge production).[^41]

Yet, as Lakoff and Johnson explain, 'the very systematicity that allows
us to comprehend one aspect of a concept in terms of another (...) will
necessarily hide other aspects of the concept'.[^42]Metaphors that
highlight certain aspects of a concept, they argue, 'can keep us from
focusing on other aspects of the concept that are inconsistent with that
metaphor'. This also applies in particular to technological metaphors,
as is the case in this article. Here transference does not occur between
concepts, but between concepts associated with a (natural) source domain
and a target domain that comprises 'a material-physical system that
affects a state of affairs'[---]{.emdash}such as databases and data
mining algorithms.[^43]Technological metaphors are frequently
criticized, because they have the potential to conceal certain aspects
of technology, while 'making others appear natural'.[^44]That is, the
politics of such metaphors operate through these twin dimensions of
naturalization (and ontologization) and obscuration, which encourage
misleading interpretations of phenomena concerned.

Such politics of metaphor will, obviously, only have any effect on our
understanding of the target domain when metaphor itself appears as a
device driving conceptualization[---]{.emdash}that is, when it operates
as a discourse metaphor. This study will demonstrate that it is only
when corporate media discourse adopted the data mining metaphor from
KDD, and repurposed it by connecting it with the domain of natural
resources, that metaphor developed into a full-blown discourse metaphor.
And it is only in possession of such meaning-making power that the
politics of the mining metaphor[---]{.emdash}naturalizing and
ontologizing[---]{.emdash}come to affect our perception of data and data
mining practices, resulting in a de-agentialized and neutralized view of
corporate data mining practices. Here de-agentialization refers to the
role of metaphor in representing the production of meaning and value in
data practices as 'brought about in \[...\] ways, impermeable to human
\[and technological\] agency' such as natural forces.[^45]

Drawing on the theory of conceptual metaphor this article will study
the*data mining is the extraction of natural resources*metaphor as a key
framing device within a corporate discourse on data mining, and
interpret the politics of such framing by examining the kind, and degree
of, naturalization and obscuration involved.[^46]Yet to be able to
interpret this role of metaphor as a shift in the discursive framing of
data practices, I will first study the role of the mining metaphor in
academic KDD discourse.

 

**Agentializing data-driven knowledge production: KDD and the mining metaphor** {#agentializing-data-driven-knowledge-production-kdd-and-the-mining-metaphor style="text-align:center"}
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Because computers have enabled humans to gather more data than we can
> digest, it is only natural to turn to computational techniques to help
> us unearth meaningful patterns and structures from the massive volumes
> of data. Hence, KDD is an attempt to address a problem that the
> digital information era made a fact of life for all of us: data
> overload.[^47]

> The decade of the 1990s has brought a growing data glut problem to the
> worlds of science, business, and government. Our capabilities for
> collecting and storing data of all kinds have far outpaced our
> abilities to analyze, summarize, and extract "knowledge" from this
> data.[^48]

Illustrated by the excerpts above, mining metaphors and associated
terminology (e.g. extraction, unearthing), had a presence in the
academic discourse of knowledge discovery in databases (KDD) in the
early 1990s. Employing such metaphorical language, KDD's academic
discourse prepared the much more extensive use of these metaphors in
later corporate media discourse, which closely followed developments in
the field. However, within KDD discourse, I argue, metaphorical language
did not function as a key discursive framing device. Metaphors
functioned mainly at the surface of discourse. They had little or no
impact on how KDD researchers understood and theorized the process of
knowledge discovery. KDD discourse, I argue, produced concepts of data
and algorithm-driven knowledge production that *agentialized *these
practices[---]{.emdash}meaningfully constructing knowledge discovery as
a multi-agential practice of producing knowledge and value from data,
involving a combination of algorithmic agencies (e.g. data
summarization; classification; regression; clustering) and human
agencies (e.g. data preparation, selection and cleaning; and the
interpretation of mined patterns). 

KDD emerged as an interdisciplinary field of research within the
computer science community in the late 1980s and early 1990s. It brought
together practitioners from a diverse array of fields including
statistics, machine learning, artificial intelligence, information
retrieval, and management information systems.[^49]Demonstrated by the
historical excerpts presented above, the field developed in response to
a problem practitioners in the field articulated in terms of a 'data
overload' and 'a growing gap between data generation and data
understanding.'[^50]In short, KDD researchers claimed that
state-of-the-art tools and methods for generating meaning and value from
data were increasingly inadequate to discover knowledge from
exponentially growing amounts of data stored in corporate computer
databases.

Since at least the mid-1970s, in close connection with the development
and implementation of database management systems (DBMS) and the theory
of the relational database model, American businesses developed an
awareness, or mindset, of the potential for data to be turned into
valuable business insights.[^51]This formed a key incentive for
systematically generating, collecting, and storing administrative and
transactional data with the aim of generating valuable business
information from it. In the late 1970s and 1980s analytical and other
cognitive capacities of data analysts still drove the process of turning
business data into valuable insights. Human data analysts employed
statistical techniques on small data sets to provide summaries and
generate reports for management executives. When the quantity of data
grew exponentially in the 1980s, however, business practitioners and
researchers increasingly realized that human-driven methods of analyses
were no longer sufficient to effectively and efficiently infer business
intelligence from large amounts of data.[^52]In result, a select amount
of researchers and business practitioners developed considerable
interest in automating the data analytical process through the use of
computers and data mining techniques.[^53]

KDD researchers defined data mining as an inductive and automated method
of data analyses, applying 'specific \[discovery\] algorithms for
extracting patterns from \[typically large amounts of\] data.'[^54]Here
inductive referred to the use of algorithmic processes for discovering
relationships and patterns from large data sets that had not already
been described in pre-established hypotheses[---]{.emdash}a definition
that is still used for the idea behind the mining of big data.[^55]The
use of this concept of data mining in KDD was a legacy from the field of
statistics[---]{.emdash}no conscious or strategic choice of researchers
to make sense of an abstract and complex process such as computational
analyses in terms of the more familiar and concrete concept of mining
for *natural* resources. In other words, natural resource extraction did
not (yet) provide a target domain for making sense of computational data
practices.

Within statistics, the term data mining was used since at least the
1960s 'to describe the process of trawling through data in the hope of
identifying patterns' without any a-priori hypothesis to verify the
findings.[^56] In this context of statistics, the term carried many
negative connotations, as many statisticians argued that patterns
detected by these methods could 'simply be a product of random
fluctuations' that didn't 'represent any underlying structure.'[^57]One
of the reasons for why computational methods for mining databases
developed in fields outside statistics,[^58]such as the sub-branch of
Artificial Intelligence research known as machine learning. Research in
machine learning focused on 'the automation of inductive learning
processes' by modeling the inductive learning methods of 'humans and
other intelligent creatures' in the machine so they can be performed by
a computer.[^59]It developed as a branch of Artificial Intelligence
research starting somewhere in the late 1950s. In the late 1980s, KDD
researchers started employing theories and techniques advanced in
machine learning (e.g. neural networks, decision trees, genetic
algorithms) for developing algorithmic methods dedicated to the task of
inferring knowledge from large data sets. KDD scientists adopted the
mining metaphor from the field of statistics, using it to refer to
computational pattern detection methods, while presenting the use of
these methods as the solution to a (corporate) 'need to find the
knowledge adrift in the flood of data'.[^60]

Discussing and explaining the value and contents of data mining, KDD
researchers did associate data mining processes with practices
of *extracting*resources. For example, in the foreword of a founding
publication of the field, KDD researcher John Ross Quinlan wrote,
'\[s\]uch collections \[one containing many thousands of records\] are
potential lodes of valuable knowledge, but in order to extract the ore,
we must have efficient mining tools.'[^61]Additionally, leading KDD
researchers Gregory Piatetsky-Shapiro and William J. Frawley defined
data mining as 'procedures to *extract*\[emphasis added\] knowledge from
data.'[^62]By use of the extraction metaphor, it seemed as if these
authors treated data mining as a tool for withdrawing some sort of
latently existent value from data. Putting forward a notion of value and
meaning as latently existing within databases also occurred by evoking
the concealed property of natural resources. For instance, such as the
case when defining data mining as 'the search for relationships and
global patterns that *exist*\[emphasis added\] in large databases, but
are "hidden" among the vast amounts of data'.[^63]

However, although mining metaphors were sometimes used in KDD
literature, any explicit reference with the extraction of natural
resources (e.g. oil, gold) was missing. Moreover, their meaning-making
power did not exceed the surface of academic discourse. That is to
say, *mining as the extraction of knowledge from data *did not meet the
conditions of a 'discourse metaphor', and had little or no impact on how
KDD researchers conceptualized the process of turning data into
knowledge. It was the concept of *knowledge discovery* rather than *data
mining* which steered their conceptualization. Researchers defined
knowledge discovery as an iterative, dynamic and constructive process of
'discovering useful knowledge from data.'[^64]They further
conceptualized the process as one in which data *accumulated* value and
meaning through a step-by-step procedure that involved data mining
through algorithmic analysis, but also 'many decisions made by the user'
to ensure the usefulness and trustworthiness of the knowledge
produced.[^65]

Importantly, KDD researchers deliberately chose knowledge discovery, not
data mining, as the label for their research to emphasize that knowledge
formed the end-product of a *knowledge-making* process[---]{.emdash}not
the starting point of a process directed at its extraction from a
database. Additionally, they made special effort to emphasize that data
mining and knowledge discovery were not to be seen as synonyms. With
knowledge discovery, as mentioned, they referred to 'the overall process
of discovering useful knowledge from data.'[^66]Data mining referred to
an essential, yet particular, step in this process. Other steps that
were considered essential parts of the process of turning data into
knowledge were, for example: developing understanding of the application
domain and the relevant prior knowledge; identifying the goal of the
process from the customer's viewpoint; data preparation, selection and
cleaning; data reduction and projection in function of the goal of the
process; matching the goal of the process with a particular data mining
method (e.g. summarization; classification; regression; clustering);
choosing data mining algorithm(s) and selection method(s) to be used for
searching for data patterns; interpreting mined patterns (and 'returning
to any of steps 1 through 7 for further iteration'); and, finally,
acting on the discovered knowledge by 'incorporating it into another
system for further action'.[^67]

KDD researchers developed data practices, methods and techniques on the
basis of a concept of knowledge discovery that acknowledged how bias and
subjectivity were integral to any data- and algorithm driven type of
knowledge production, to ensure such variables had as little effect as
possible on the knowledge produced. That KDD researchers were strongly
aware of the pitfalls of their automated approach to the analyses of
large data sets is also reflected by their attention for issues
associated with: the imperfect nature of the data (e.g. garbled and
missing data);[^68]the inductive nature of its methods of analysis (e.g.
finding patterns that appear to be statistically significant but, in
fact, are not)[^69]; and algorithmic bias.[^70]In sum, I argue, KDD
researchers agentialized and de-neutralized data- and algorithm driven
knowledge production[---]{.emdash}representing knowledge as output of a
process through which data accumulated value and meaning through the
potential subjective mediation of algorithmic and human agencies. 

 

**The mining metaphor as discursive framing device in corporate media discourse** {#the-mining-metaphor-as-discursive-framing-device-in-corporate-media-discourse style="text-align:center"}
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> There is a gold-rush on. Only this time, the hunt is not for gold of
> the shiny metallic type, but the digital variety made up of bytes of
> information.[^71]

> There's gold in your data, but you can't see it. It may be as simple
> (and wealth-producing) as the realization that baby-food buyers are
> probably also diaper purchasers. It may be as profound as a new law of
> nature. But no human who's looked at your data has seen this hidden
> gold. How can you find it?[^72]

As discussed, research in KDD had strong ties with the corporate world
and developed in response to an issue that particularly in the business
world was perceived as both a problem and opportunity[---]{.emdash}the
(in)ability to efficiently and effectively draw knowledge from
increasingly large data sets. Although data mining methods and
techniques were still at an extremely early stage of development in the
mid-1990s, various data mining technologies developed for business
appear on the market during this period. Examples
include *Darwin*developed by Thinking Machines, *MineSet*developed by
Silicon Graphics and the *Intelligent Data Miner*developed by IBM. The
trade press started reporting on the nascent data mining industry at an
early stage, closely following technological advances in what seemed to
be a most promising field. To the dismay of KDD researchers, data mining
developed into a true media hype in the mid-1990s. Hype was supported by
a business-oriented rationale of reporting, set out to explain how data
mining formed a huge opportunity to maximize profit by leveraging idle
data resources. The *data mining is the extraction of natural
resources*metaphor (extraction of gold in particular) embodied the
business rationale. From the mid-1990s onwards, the metaphor developed
into a key device for conceptualizing, envisioning and promoting the
economic value of data mining for business. 

In order to properly substantiate the role of this *mining for gold*
metaphor in meaningfully framing data-driven value production in the
corporate world, it is important to first briefly outline the context of
reporting in which the metaphor was used. Here it is important to
understand that the trade-press did not just report developments in KDD
research and data mining applications in business[---]{.emdash}it also
played an important role in shaping and feeding the need of business
organizations for employing the new technologies in the first place.
Firstly, corporate media discourse emphasized that volumes of data
amassed and stored by business organizations were 'exploding,'[^73]yet
at the same time it portrayed such 'vast amount\[s\] of data \[...\]
being collected' as 'lying idle', having little purpose or value for
organizations.[^74]

Importantly, news articles promoted data mining as the means to
relatively easily turn such worthless data into economic value. The
presumed relationship between data mining and financial gain is strongly
reflected in titles of news articles such as: 'Mining for Dollars'
(1996);[^75]'Datamining unearths dollars from data' (1997);[^76]'Strike
it rich' (1997);[^77]and 'Poppin fresh dough' (1997).[^78]Even though
there were few actual applications of data mining, examples of
successful applications were frequently cited to make concrete how data
mining could increase profit. Here emphasis was placed on the use of
data on customers and buying patterns[---]{.emdash}as exemplified in the
article 'Unearthing underground data' (1996): 

> Grocery chains have analyzed customers' baskets of purchases and
> learned that cosmetics buyers typically also purchase greeting cams.
> They've subsequently increased sales in both product categories by
> redesigning store layouts to ensure that the two product lines were
> positioned in the same aisle.[^79]

Additionally, the trade press emphasized the need for a rapid response
by promoting data mining not only as the essential means for businesses
to increase financial gain, but also as a way to improve their
competitive position. As journalist Sara Reese Hedberg wrote in the
computer magazine Byte in 1995: 

> The amount of information stored in databases is exploding. From
> zillions of point-of-sale transactions and credit card purchases to
> pixel-by-pixel images of galaxies, databases are now measured in
> gigabytes and terabytes. In today's fiercely competitive business
> environment, companies need to rapidly turn those terabytes of raw
> data into significant insights to guide their marketing, investment,
> and management strategies.[^80]

Such news items on data mining in the 1990s, I argue, shaped the meaning
of data mining in service of a business rationale of efficiency and
economics, which, as I will argue, facilitated the unquestioned adoption
and implementation of data mining technologies by American business.

 

**Mining for gold** {#mining-for-gold style="text-align:center"}
-------------------

> While the practice of corporate data warehousing and data mining is
> receiving a lot of hype, there's considerable confusion about what it
> is and who should be using it. The vague, even proprietary terminology
> for describing this sophisticated approach to storing and retrieving
> database information hides the serious technology that comprises this
> practice.[^81]

The use of the mining for gold metaphor by the American trade-press
played a crucial role in the production and promotion of a business
rationale of data mining that emphasized its managerial and financial
benefits. As mentioned in the excerpt above, the press paid little
attention to explaining the workings of data mining technology, which, I
argue, enforced the power of natural resource metaphors to meaningfully
frame data practices discussed in corporate media discourse. The mining
for gold metaphor, I argue, produced a neutralized and de-agentialized
understanding of data mining[---]{.emdash}that is, it shaped and
reinforced a corporate perception of automated methods of data analyses
as intermediary and objective vehicles for extracting valuable insights
from data. The mining for gold metaphor conceptualized data mining as
such by mapping two interrelated concepts drawn from the natural
resource domain of gold mining onto data practices, that is: (1) the
idea that valuable insights already have a latent existence in data; and
(2) the idea that data mining methods manifest (rather than construct)
this value through extraction.

*The latent existence of value in mountains of data*

> There's gold in them there \[sic\] databases! That's the rallying cry
> of business analysts and database administrators who have discovered
> the techniques and benefits of data mining.[^82]

> It's in there. The discovery, the fact, the one piece of the puzzle
> that will blow away the competition, propel your company to the top,
> and stick a \`\`VP'' after your name. It's right there, in your
> database. But you can't see it. Yet.[^83]

In the historical examples from news items on data mining cited above,
information is treated as something that always already *exists
within*the databases. Analogous to nuggets of gold, valuable insights
("the one piece of the puzzle") are presented as pre-existing the method
of their excavation, as somehow already present "right there, in your
database". Making use of the same analogy with the mode of existence of
natural resources, news articles describe how such insights are buried
deep within layers of data, hidden from human perception. Exemplified by
the excerpts below, data is treated as some kind of
ore[---]{.emdash}analogous to the ores in which gold occurs in
nature[---]{.emdash}providing a containing and protecting body that
conceals valuable pieces of information:

> Deep within the pulsating mass of bits and bytes strung throughout the
> enterprise lie answers to the most perplexing problems of any
> business. Which customers will turn to competitors? Which offers will
> prompt customers to buy more? What are the signs of fraudulent
> activity?[^84]

> You know it's there. Buried in gigabytes of marketing data or
> point-of-sale transactions lies the key information about an important
> customer trend or a successful product launch. Now all you have to do
> is extract it in a way that informs the decision at hand.[^85]

> Data mining will likely have many network users digging in their
> organization's databases for buried treasure.[^86]

> Sophisticated new tools ... help to remove the information "ore"
> buried in corporate files or archival public records.[^87]

Valuable insights formulated as 'answers to the most perplexing problems
of any business' or 'key information about an important customer trend'
are presented as existing buried within a data
ore[---]{.emdash}'pulsating mass of bits and bytes'; 'gigabytes of
marketing data or point-of-sale transactions' [---]{.emdash}that just
needs to be removed for these insights to appear in the self-contained
form of a business asset that can be used to drive managerial
decision-making. 

The problem of the analogy with gold mining, as pointed out by Puschman
and Burgess, lies in 'inferring certain properties of the target that
the source domain possesses but that do not map onto the
target'.[^88]For example, the *given*character of a natural resource is
not in accordance with the *constructed*nature of data. Due to the
analogy with a physical source domain so familiar to our notion of how
value is created from given resources such as gold, the idea of data as
a resource given by nature appears as quite natural to us. As Gitelman
and Jackson point out, '\[a\]t first glance data are apparently before
the fact: they are the starting point for what we know
\[...\]'.[^89]Yet, they point out, the result of treating data as
starting point is 'an unnoticed assumption that data are transparent,
that information is self-evident, the fundamental stuff of truth
itself'.[^90]Gitelman and Jackson attempt to make clear in their book
that data has no ground of existence independent of the human
imagination of data, which, they argue, is always grounded in an
'interpretative base'.[^91]And these interpretations, they emphasize,
already play an important role in generating and producing data. Rather
than being extracted, all data is created by humans to be recorded by
machines. Approaching data as analogous to the natural resource of gold
thus naturalizes[---]{.emdash}presents as naturally
given[---]{.emdash}something that cannot exist without human
interventions in its production[---]{.emdash}the reason why Gitelman and
Jackson consider the phrase 'raw data' an 'oxymoron'. By disabling human
agencies on the production side of data, the metaphor is also misleading
because it conceals the representational nature of stored
data[---]{.emdash}the fact that it is always an abstraction (sample) of
what it represents, and not reality itself (population). This also means
the metaphor ignores issues related to possible human (selection and
observational) bias involved in the creation of data, which can affect
the reliability and integrity of datasets.

The problem of treating the value of data as naturally
given[---]{.emdash}something that always already
exists[---]{.emdash}within the databases, however, goes beyond
suppressing the role of human and technological agencies in the
production of data. There is another property natural resources such as
gold possess, which does not map onto the relation between data and
information. Gold actually *exists*as a thing, a nugget ready-formed in
the earth. It thus has an actual ontological status in the sense of it
pre-existing within the earth a-priori to its method of extraction,
already harboring an inherent economic value. Unlike gold, information
doesn't exist in a nugget-like form prior to the process of mining the
data. The mining for gold metaphor, however, plays an important role in
what van den Boomen refers to as *ontologizing[---]{.emdash}*treating
information, or business intelligence, as if it composes a stable matter
of fact that has an independent existence. As van den Boomen points out,
'\[i\]n the act of ontologizing dynamic processes get substituted with
their results'.[^92]Here it means that through ontologizing business
insights are treated as things with an ingrained economic value that
latently exist within a data ore, waiting for the moment that this value
is discovered. This is misleading, as rather than being inherent to
data, value is accumulated by, and actively assigned to, data through
algorithmic analysis and human interventions in the preparation,
selection, and interpretation of data tools and their
outputs[---]{.emdash}an agentic notion of *knowledge discovery*that, as
discussed, was actively promoted within the KDD research community.

 

Manifesting value through extraction  {#manifesting-value-through-extraction style="text-align:center"}
-------------------------------------

> Data mining lets the power of computers do the work of sifting through
> your vast data stores. Tireless and relentless searching can find the
> tiny nugget of gold in a mountain of data slag.[^93]

> Data mining is the act of drilling through huge volumes of information
> in order to discover relationships, or to answer specific questions,
> that are too broad in nature for traditional query tools.[^94]

> Varghese believes the big payoff from data warehousing and mining will
> not come with new tools, but with training users to dig deep into the
> vast store of business data.[^95] 

> Datamining is the industry's latest solution to the problem of
> unearthing data that has been carefully squirreled away.[^96]

The natural resource metaphor is embedded within the extraction
metaphor[---]{.emdash}the latter referring to the process of withdrawing
the resource from the earthly body that contains it. In the excerpts
cited above, mining is sometimes explicitly referred to as extraction,
or implicitly through the use of associated metaphors that treat data
mining as a process of removing the 'information nuggets' from its
container (e.g. sifting, digging, drilling, unearthing). Through analogy
with these extraction verbs, I argue, data mining techniques are treated
as *vehicles*[---]{.emdash}that is, intermediary processes that act as a
means for unlocking and transferring value and meaning from its
concealed and worthless existence in data, to a more worthy and
actionable existence above ground in the world of corporate management:

> Data mining (DM) ... is the computer-assisted process of digging
> through and analyzing enormous sets of data and then extracting the
> meaning of the data nuggets.[^97]

> In reality, data mining is the process of sifting through vast amounts
> of information in order to extract meaning and discover new
> knowledge.[^98]

> The whole point of data mining is to reveal hidden information for
> prompt decision-making and action.[^99]

> Mining for data: A powerful new query ability lets users drill down
> through millions of records to grab golden nuggets of information
> that, when combined, yield creative answers to questions no one ever
> thought to ask.[^100]

> A raft of data mining tools offers a wide range of features for
> digging up business opportunities.[^101]

> Oftentimes, datamining can unearth fundamental facts about a company's
> business.[^102]

Illustrated by the examples above, data mining is presented as a
value *extraction*rather than a value *creation*process[---]{.emdash}one
in which data mining techniques 'extract meaning'; 'reveal hidden
information'; 'grab golden nuggets of information; 'dig\[...\] up
business opportunities; and 'unearth fundamental facts'. To demonstrate
how such extracted information could directly be of value for corporate
organizations, news articles linked them to a variety of purposes and
results:

> Data mining is the process of sifting through mountains of data for
> patterns usually buying patterns that could be useful for marketing or
> other purposes.[^103]

> What WalMart and several other MPP system buyers are most interested
> in doing is "data mining," digging through mounds of data in search of
> buying patterns and other nuggets of information on which to build
> marketing strategies and create new products.[^104]

> Have you learned anything new from your data lately? Datamining will
> help you find subtle, unexpected patterns hidden in your database,
> which could lead to increased sales and healthier profits.[^105]

> Strike it rich! Thanks to new datamining tools, companies are
> unearthing valuable information about their customers. The result?
> Closer customer relationships and a healthier bottom line.[^106]

Illustrated by these excerpts, corporate discourse emphasized the
results and benefits of data mining[---]{.emdash}'marketing';
'creat\[ing\] new products'; 'increased sales and healthier profits';
and 'closer customer relationships'. While emphasizing its corporate
benefits, most of the articles paid little attention to the advanced
technology involved in data mining, which certainly strengthened the
power of metaphor to make data mining sound as easy as using a word
processor or a spreadsheet.

Again, the problem with the analogy between data mining (target) and the
type of extraction processes involved in the mining for natural
resources (source) is that the properties of the source domain do not
match with the properties of the target domain on which they are mapped.
The metaphor of extraction directs focus to an understanding of data
mining as a non-agential transfer process[---]{.emdash}merely
*transporting*meaning and value from its data container to a more
actionable existence within the organization. This obscures the fact
that data doesn't *possess*value and meaning but has to *acquire*value
and meaning through human practices and technological processes that
help to contextualize it.[^107]What is portrayed as an extraction
procedure is actually a meaning-making process in which computational
mining techniques and operations[---]{.emdash}such as classification,
vectorization, optimization, probabilization and pattern
recognition[---]{.emdash}are employed to make sense of the data and
to *create*a 'nugget' of information. In other words, through data
mining value and meaning is actively assigned to data, which means such
methods have an agential capacity in a process of making meaning.

These methods, as discussed, are not neutral or value-free, but
developed on the basis of particular theories of how to infer value from
finite data sets[---]{.emdash}theories that all have their own
assumptions and concepts of the relation between data and information,
meaning the idea of bias underlies all of them. In that respect, the
data mining as extraction metaphor is misleading because it distances
business intelligence from all technological and human agencies involved
in data's meaningful contextualization. Placing focus on business
insights as things subject to excavation, the metaphor denies the
agential capacity and role both algorithmic technologies and humans play
in what is actually a mediated process of *constructing*(not extracting)
knowledge from data, thereby automatically cancelling out a moment of
critical reflection on the nature of the knowledge produced.

 

**Conclusions** {#conclusions style="text-align:center"}
---------------

Using a historical perspective, this article traced a shift in the
meaning-making power of the data mining metaphor in the 1990s, comparing
KDD and corporate media discourses. Here I followed recent works arguing
for the importance of studying discourses *surrounding* data practices
and algorithmic processes,[^108] including metaphors,[^109]because, as
claimed, discursively constructed concepts of such real-world phenomena
are also key factors of 'their potential power'. I studied how a concept
of data mining was variously constructed within these different
discourses, directing particular attention to a significant change in
the role of the mining metaphor as conceptualization device shaping
understandings of value production through data practices. As argued,
the mining metaphor developed from a device with marginal impact on the
meaningful construction of data practices within KDD discourse, into a
full-blown discourse metaphor when natural resource extraction suddenly
appeared as a source domain in corporate discourse. The metaphor framed
such media discourse, and played a very significant part in discursively
shaping a dominant concept of these practices. This metaphor-driven
conceptualization, I argue, led to critical misrepresentations of data
and data practices, which continue to exist and affect current
interpretations.

Within the field of KDD, the metaphor of discovery rather than mining
functioned as a framing device for data practices. Metaphors associated
with the domain of natural resource extraction had a presence in KDD
discourse, yet had little or no impact on how KDD researchers
conceptualized their efforts. KDD researchers conceptualized data mining
as the application of (algorithmic) methods for finding useful patterns
in data. They inherited this more technical understanding of the concept
from the field of statistics. In contrast to later corporate media
discourses, the extent to which the concept derived meaning from the
domain of natural resource extraction was negligible. That is to say,
concepts from the domain of natural resource extraction didn't provide
any explanatory bridge for the conceptualization of data practices, nor
was data discussed analogous to a natural resource (e.g. oil, gold).
Instead, KDD researchers employed the discovery metaphor to communicate
their preferred understanding of these practices. As a linguistic
device, however, this metaphor had little impact on how data practices
were conceptualized in KDD discourse. Conceptualization occurred by
accurately defining the relevant terms, and by splitting the data to
knowledge trajectory into a series of component processes and practices.
Knowledge discovery was specified as a multi-step process for generating
knowledge from data, involving a combination of human and algorithmic
agencies, all considered essential to data practices. KDD discourse, in
that sense*, agentialized* rather than *de-agentialized*data and
algorithm-driven knowledge production. It portrayed data practices in
terms of an agentic notion of knowledge discovery[---]{.emdash}as a
process of *knowledge-construction *in which value is accumulated by,
and actively assigned to, data through a combination of algorithmic
agencies (e.g. mining patterns through summarization; classification;
regression; clustering) and human agencies (e.g. data selection,
cleaning; reduction and projection of data in function of objective;
interpretation of mined patterns).Importantly, by detailing rather than
obscuring these agencies, KDD discourse foregrounded the potentially
non-neutral, partial, biased, and subjective nature of its efforts.

In the corporate media discourses that developed from the mid-1990s
onwards, however, the mining metaphor rapidly developed into a
discursive framing device that shaped collective understandings of data
practices. Moreover, it did so by meaningfully connecting the notion of
mining to the domain of natural resource extraction rather than the
field of statistics. In corporate media discourse, I argue, the metaphor
*data mining is the extraction of natural resources *helped produce and
promote a business rationale of data-driven knowledge production
highlighting financial and organizational benefits of leveraging
abundant data resources. While the metaphor helped to promote data
mining's benefits for business, it did so through the discursive
construction of a de-agentialized concept of knowledge production
through data mining. Through the analogy with the process of extracting
natural resources such as gold, data-driven knowledge production was
neutralized[---]{.emdash}cancelling out all agential forces (e.g.
algorithmic decisions and human interpretations) contributing to a
process of data *accumulating*meaning and value. In effect, metaphorical
representation constructed an image of data mining as natural, more
specifically, objective and neutral process.

The dominant presence of metaphors associated with natural resource
extraction in contemporary big data discourses only gives evidence to
the fact that metaphors continue to play a dominant role in shaping and
coloring the corporate perception of the data to knowledge trajectory.
The role of discourse in promoting such a value-neutral business
rationale is problematic, maybe even dangerous, as many critical media
scholars have pointed out. By associating big data practices with a
misleading image of objectivity, such discourses facilitate the
unquestioned acceptance of big data in the business
world.[^110]Moreover, they protect the corporate world from ethical
questioning.[^111]The same applies also to other domains, such as
science and government, in which data mining techniques are increasingly
used to produce knowledge or inform decision-making. Deconstructing the
discursive devices (such as metaphors) through which data analytical
processes are conceptualized, helps to show how dominant conceptions do
not neatly map onto practices and processes at hand, involving critical
misrepresentations. Data mining, as many media scholars have argued, is
not a neutral vehicle of value transportation, and, as stressed in the
article, so aren't the conceptual metaphors we 'mine' by. To ensure that
all people currently working with big data analytics (in business
science, or government) maintain critical agency, it is crucial that we
keep on deconstructing the celebratory discourses currently in power of
(mis)shaping our collective understanding of data practices.

To prevent the unquestioned acceptance of these practices in the worlds
of business, science and government, it is important that we provide
representations that employ more accurate framings that do more neatly
map onto data practices and processes at hand rather than ones
constructed through the use of easy and attractive natural resource
metaphors. Using a historical perspective, this article exposed
contingencies in the connection between explanations of data practices
and the domain of natural resources, and showed that in the absence of
this connection, KDD discourse provided alternative and more accurate
representations of data practices. I assert that we can learn from KDD
discourse, and how it conceptualized data mining as a component step in
a broader process of knowledge discovery. As a starting point, we can
(re)position the notion of *knowledge discovery* rather than *data
mining *at the center of discourses surrounding data practices. In doing
so, the discursive construction of the data to knowledge trajectory will
depart from the end-product[---]{.emdash}knowledge[---]{.emdash}rather
than a presumed (natural) starting point[---]{.emdash}data. This will
encourage us to conceptualize *discovery* as a multi-agential process
of *making* knowledge from data, instead of conceptualizing the
trajectory as a de-agentialized practice of exploiting a data resource
through extraction, that is mining. 

![](88x31.png "https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by/4.0/88x31.png")

Unless otherwise specified, all work in this journal is licensed under
a [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
:::
:::

[^1]: Arvind Singh, \"[Is Big Data the New Black
    Gold?](https://www.wired.com/insights/2013/02/is-big-data-the-new-black-gold/),\"  *Wired*
    (2013).

[^2]: unknown, \"[The World's Most Valuable Resource Is No Longer Oil,
    but
    Data](https://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21721656-data-economy-demands-new-approach-antitrust-rules-worlds-most-valuable-resource),\"  *The
    Economist* (2017).

[^3]: Jocelyn  Goldfein and Ivy  Nguyen, \"[Data Is Not the New
    Oil](https://techcrunch.com/2018/03/27/data-is-not-the-new-oil/),\"  *Techcrunch.com*
    (2018).

[^4]: Joris Toonders, \"[Data Is the New Oil of the Digital
    Economy](https://www.wired.com/insights/2014/07/data-new-oil-digital-economy/),\"  *Wired.com*
    (2014).

[^5]: Cornelius Puschmann and Jean Burgess, "Big Data, Big Questions\|
    Metaphors of Big Data," *International Journal of Communication* 8
    (2014).

[^6]: Puschmann and Burgess, "Big Data, Big Questions," 1699.

[^7]: Viktor Mayer-Schönberger and Kenneth Cukier, *Big Data: A
    Revolution That Will Transform How We Live, Work and Think* (Boston:
    Mariner Books, 2014).

[^8]: Marianne van den Boomen, *Transcoding the Digital: How Metaphors
    Matter in New Media* (Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures,
    2014), 23.

[^9]: George Lakoff and Mark Johnson, *Metaphors We Live By* (Chicago:
    University of Chicago press, 1980).

[^10]: Nick Couldry and Jun Yu, "Deconstructing Datafication's Brave New
    World," *New Media & Society*  (2018); David Beer, "Envisioning the
    Power of Data Analytics," *Information, Communication & Society* 21,
    no. 3 (2018); Rob Kitchin, *The Data Revolution: Big Data, Open
    Data, Data Infrastructures and Their Consequences* (Sage, 2014).

[^11]: I chose to focus on popular technology magazines to represent
    corporate media discourse based on the assumption that these sources
    played the most important role in creating a media hype about
    data-mining, using metaphorical language. This is in contrast to
    other possible sources such as handbooks, training manuals, business
    education materials, technology reviews, and software manuals.
    Magazine advertisements and TV commercials about data mining and
    database technology did contribute to the media hype and also made
    use of metaphorics (e.g. IBM's 1996 television commercial that was
    part of its "Solutions for a Small Planet" advertising
    campaign**)**. However, these do not show a different kind of
    metaphorical depiction than the news sources I
    studied[---]{.emdash}the main reason why advertising has not been
    included in the corpus.

[^12]: The initial choice was to focus on the popular technology
    magazines *Datamation*and *Byte *that were read by business
    personnel working in the entire field of business computing and data
    processing. Both magazines had large circulation numbers in the
    1990s and were distributed internationally (including Europe),
    although published in the United States. Because an online search in
    English language publications pertaining to all geographical regions
    indexed by LexisNexis and the global business information database
    Dow Jones Factiva (which includes *Byte*and *Datamation*) returned
    news articles from other well circulated news publications as well,
    I chose to include them in the corpus. I queried both database's
    English language publications for "data-mining" and associated
    keywords including: "data processing"; "data warehouse"; "gold
    rush"; "OLAP";  and "knowledge discovery". The search retrieved ca.
    90 relevant news articles.

[^13]: All articles analyzed in this research were printed in magazines
    and trade journals published in the United States directed at an
    audience of business professionals. Although printed in the US, key
    publications such as *Byte* and *Datamation* were distributed
    internationally, which means it is safe to say they their discourses
    impacted industry professionals outside of the US context.

[^14]: Kitchin; David Beer, "How Should We Do the History of Big
    Data?," *Big Data & Society* 3, no. 1 (2016).

[^15]: Amelia Acker, "Toward a Hermeneutics of Data," *IEEE Annals of
    the History of Computing* 37, no. 3 (2015).

[^16]: Lisa Gitelman and Virginia Jackson, "Introduction," in *"Raw
    Data" Is an Oxymoron*, ed. Lisa Gitelman (Cambridge; London: The MIT
    Press, 2013).

[^17]: Daniel A McFarland and H Richard McFarland, "Big Data and the
    Danger of Being Precisely Inaccurate," *Big Data & Society* 2, no. 2
    (2015).

[^18]: Julia Adams and Hannah Brückner, "Wikipedia, Sociology, and the
    Promise and Pitfalls of Big Data," ibid.

[^19]: David Beer, "The Social Power of Algorithms," *Information,
    Communication & Society* 20, no. 1 (2017); Tarleton Gillespie, "The
    Relevance of Algorithms," in *Media Technologies: Essays on
    Communication, Materiality, and Society*, ed. Tarleton Gillespie,
    Pablo J Boczkowski, and Kirsten A Foot (MIT Press, 2014).

[^20]: Adrian Mackenzie, *Machine Learners : Archaeology of a Data
    Practice* (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017); Bernhard
    Rieder, *Engines of Order* (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press,
    2019 (To be published).

[^21]: Frank Pasquale, *Black Box Society: The Secret Algorithms That
    Control Money and Information* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
    Press, 2016), 21.

[^22]: John Danaher et al., "Algorithmic Governance: Developing a
    Research Agenda through the Power of Collective Intelligence," *Big
    Data & Society* 4, no. 2 (2017).

[^23]: Beer, "The Social Power of Algorithms," 11.

[^24]: Beer, "The Social Power of Algorithms," 11.

[^25]: David Beer, "How Should We Do the History of Big Data?," *Big
    Data & Society* 3, no. 1 (2016).

[^26]: Beer, "The Social Power of Algorithms."

[^27]: Beer, "The Social Power of Algorithms," 7.

[^28]: Beer, "The Social Power of Algorithms," 11.

[^29]: Beer, "The Social Power of Algorithms," 7.

[^30]: José Van Dijck, "Datafication, Dataism and Dataveillance: Big
    Data between Scientific Paradigm and Ideology," *Surveillance &
    Society* 12, no. 2 (2014).

[^31]: Kitchin distinguishes an academic from a business rationale.
    According to Kitchin, the academic variant promotes big data in
    terms of advancing knowledge and developing a better understanding
    of the world. In the business rationale, on the other hand, big
    data's financial importance is emphasized.

[^32]: Couldry and Yu, "Deconstructing Datafication's Brave New World,"
    3.

[^33]: van den Boomen, *Transcoding the Digital*.

[^34]: van den Boomen, *Transcoding the Digital*, 187.

[^35]: Zhongdang Pan and Gerald M. Kosicki, "Framing Analysis: An
    Approach to News Discourse," *Political Communication* 10, no. 1
    (1993).

[^36]: Jörg Zinken, Iina Hellsten, and Brigitte Nerlich, "Discourse
    Metaphors," *Body, language and mind* 2 (2008).

[^37]: Zinken, Hellsten, Brigitte Nerlich, "Discourse Metaphors," 241.

[^38]: Puschmann and Burgess, "Big Data, Big Questions," 1696.

[^39]: Lakoff and Johnson, *Metaphors We Live By*.

[^40]: Lakoff and Johnson, *Metaphors We Live By*.

[^41]: Rowan Wilken, "An Exploratory Comparative Analysis of the Use of
    Metaphors in Writing on the Internet and Mobile Phones," *Social
    Semiotics*23, no. 5 (2013).

[^42]: Lakoff and Johnson, *Metaphors We Live By*, 13.

[^43]: van den Boomen, *Transcoding the Digital*, 51.

[^44]: Puschmann and Burgess, "Big Data, Big Questions," 1697.

[^45]: Theo van Leeuwen, "Representing Social Action," *Discourse &
    Society* 6, no. 1 (1995): 96.

[^46]: I started the analysis with an open-ended reading of all of the
    selected texts without very specific questions or hypotheses
    constraining the analysis. Because the size of the corpus was not
    too large, and the average length of the articles was not too long,
    I read all of the texts completely. In reading I did pay close
    attention to headlines, the first one or two paragraphs of all the
    articles constituting the corpus, what technological objects they
    discussed, and if and how they employed metaphor to constitute these
    objects discursively. I selected the quotes included in the article
    on the basis of the extent to which they aligned with the discourse
    metaphor *data mining is the extraction of natural resources*.

[^47]: Usama Fayyad, Gregory Piatetsky-Shapiro, and Padhraic Smyth,
    "From Data Mining to Knowledge Discovery in Databases," *AI
    magazine* 17, no. 3 (1996): 28.

[^48]: Usama M Fayyad et al., *Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data
    Mining*, Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (Menlo
    Park, CA: AAAI Press and MIT Press, 1996), xiii.

[^49]: Usama M Fayyad, "Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery: Making
    Sense out of Data," *IEEE Expert: Intelligent Systems and Their
    Applications* 11, no. 5 (1996): 23.

[^50]: William J Frawley, Gregory Piatetsky-Shapiro, and Christopher J
    Matheus, "Knowledge Discovery in Databases: An Overview,"
    in *Knowledge Discovery in Databases*, ed. William J Frawley and
    Gregory Piatetsky-Shapiro (AAAI Press Menlo Park, CA, 1991), 2.

[^51]: Niels Kerssens, "The Database 'Revolution': The Technological and
    Cultural Origins of the Big Data-Based Mindset in American
    Management. 1970s-1980s," *TMG - Journal for Media History *21, no.
    2 (2018).

[^52]: William J Frawley, Gregory Piatetsky-Shapiro, and Christopher J
    Matheus, "Knowledge Discovery in Databases: An Overview," *AI
    magazine*13, no. 3 (1992); Ronald J Brachman et al., "Mining
    Business Databases," *Communications of the ACM* 39, no. 11 (1996).

[^53]: Jan M Zytkow and John Baker, "Interactive Mining of Regularities
    in Databases," in *Knowledge Discovery in Databases*, ed. William J
    Frawley and Gregory Piatetsky-Shapiro (AAAI Press Menlo Park, CA,
    1991), 31.

[^54]: Fayyad, Piatetsky-Shapiro, and Smyth, "From Data Mining to
    Knowledge Discovery in Databases," 39.

[^55]: Dyche (2012) thus argues that 'mining Big Data reveals
    relationships and patterns that we didn't even know to look for.'
    (in Kitchin, *The Data Revolution.*)

[^56]: David J Hand, "Data Mining: Statistics and More?," *The American
    Statistician*52, no. 2 (1998): 112.

[^57]: Hand, "Data Mining: Statistics and More?"

[^58]: Leo Breiman, "Statistical Modeling: The Two Cultures (with
    Comments and a Rejoinder by the Author)," *Statistical science*16,
    no. 3 (2001).

[^59]: Marcel Holsheimer, *Data Mining: The Search for Knowledge in
    Databases*(Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Centrum voor Wiskunde en
    Informatica, 1994), 8.

[^60]: Frawley, Piatetsky-Shapiro, and Matheus, "Knowledge Discovery in
    Databases: An Overview," 2.

[^61]: John Ross Quinlan, "Foreword," In *Knowledge Discovery in
    Databases*, x.

[^62]: William J Frawley, Gregory Piatetsky-Shapiro, and Christopher J
    Matheus, "Knowledge Discovery in Databases: An
    Overview," In *Knowledge Discovery in Databases*, 15.

[^63]: Holsheimer,*Data Mining: The Search for Knowledge in
    Databases,*1.

[^64]: Fayyad, Piatetsky-Shapiro, and Smyth, Fayyad, Piatetsky-Shapiro,
    and Smyth, "From Data Mining to Knowledge Discovery in Databases,"
    39.

[^65]: "The Kdd Process for Extracting Useful Knowledge from Volumes of
    Data," *Communications of the ACM* 39, no. 11 (1996).

[^66]: Fayyad, Piatetsky-Shapiro, and Smyth,"From Data Mining to
    Knowledge Discovery in Databases," 39.

[^67]: Fayyad, Piatetsky-Shapiro, and Smyth,"From Data Mining to
    Knowledge Discovery in Databases," 42.

[^68]: Quinlan, "Foreword," In *Knowledge Discovery in Databases*, x.

[^69]: Fayyad, Piatetsky-Shapiro, and Smyth, "From Data Mining to
    Knowledge Discovery in Databases," 40.

[^70]: Quinlan, "Foreword," In *Knowledge Discovery in Databases*, x.

[^71]: Michael Luck, "Nuggets of Information: Exploiting Data
    Resources," *Computing*  (1992).

[^72]: Edmund X DeJes  us, "Data Mining: Turn Computers Loose on Your
    Data, and You Don't Know What They'll Come up with-That's the Whole
    Point," *Byte* 20, no. 10 (1995).

[^73]: Sara Reese Hedberg, "The Data Gold Rush: Smart Data Miners Are
    Cashing in on Valuable Information Buried in Private and Public Data
    Sources,"*Byte* 20, no. 10 (October 10 1995): 83.

[^74]: Luck, "Nuggets of Information: Exploiting Data Resources."

[^75]: David Aubrey, "Mining for Dollars," *Computer Shopper* 16, no. 8
    (1996).

[^76]: Eva Freeman, "Datamining Unearths Dollars from
    Data," *Datamation* 43, no. 7 (1997).

[^77]: Vance McCarthy, "Strike It Rich! Thanks to New Datamining Tools,
    Companies Are Unearthing Valuable Information About Their Customers.
    The Result? Closer Customer Relationships and a Healthier Bottom
    Line," *Datamation *43, no. 2 (1997): 44.

[^78]: Michael J. Tucker, "Poppin' Fresh Dough," *Datamation*43, no. 5
    (1997): 50-60.

[^79]: Cheryl D Krivda, "Unearthing Underground Data," *LAN magazine*
    11, no. 5 (1996).

[^80]: Hedberg, "The Data Gold Rush."

[^81]: Aubrey, "Mining for Dollars."

[^82]: Barbara DePompa, "There's Gold in Databases: New Tools Will Help
    Companies Extract Valuable Information," *Information week*, no. 561
    (1996).

[^83]: Hedberg, "The Data Gold Rush."

[^84]: Julie Bort, "Data Mining's Midas Touch; Data Mining Tools Are
    Helping Companies Reap Rewards from Their Data Warehouses," *Info
    World*  (1996).

[^85]: Alan Simon, "Without the Proper End-User Tools for Data Access
    and Analysis, Your Data Warehouse May Be Shuttered. Better Clients,
    Better Decisions," *Byte* 22, no. 1 (1997).

[^86]: Cheryl D. Krivda, "Datamining Dynamite: Blasting Loose Those
    Buried Nuggets of Information Requires Clean Data, Warehousing
    Strategies, Powerful Parallel Processors, and Heaps of Hard Disk
    Space," *Byte *20, no. 10 (October 10 1995): 97.

[^87]: Scott Mace, "Data Turns into Gold for Information
    Detectives," *Info World*  (1994).

[^88]: Puschmann and Burgess, "Big Data, Big Questions."

[^89]: Gitelman and Jackson, "Introduction," 2.

[^90]: Gitelman and Jackson, "Introduction," 2.

[^91]: Gitelman and Jackson, "Introduction," 3.

[^92]: van den Boomen, *Transcoding the Digital,* 37.

[^93]: Edmund X. DeJesus, "Data Mining: Turn Computers Loose on Your
    Data, and You Don't Know What They'll Come up with-That's the Whole
    Point." *Byte* 20, no. 10 (October 10 1995): 83.

[^94]: Julie Bort, "Data Mining's Midas Touch."

[^95]: DePompa, "There's Gold in Databases."

[^96]: Deborah Asbrand, "Is Datamining Ready for the
    Masses?," *Datamation* 43, no. 11 (1997).

[^97]: Hedberg, "The Data Gold Rush."

[^98]: Hedberg, "The Data Gold Rush."

[^99]: Cheryl D Krivda, "Datamining Dynamite."

[^100]: Louis Connor, "Mining for Data: A Powerful New Query Ability
    Lets Users Drill Down through Millions of Records to Grab Golden
    Nuggets of Information That, When Combined, Yield Creative Answers
    to Questions No One Ever Thought to Ask," *Communications Week*, no.
    596 (1996).

[^101]: Herb Edelstein, "Mining for Gold: A Raft of Data Mining Tools
    Offers a Wide Range of Features for Digging up Business
    Opportunities. Here's How to Find the Best Product for
    You.," *Information Week*, no. 627 (1997).

[^102]: Vance McCarthy, "Strike It Rich!"

[^103]: Kevin Fogarty, "Data Mining Can Help to Extract Jewels of
    Data," *Network World* 11, no. 23 (1994).

[^104]: Michael Alexander, "Mine for Gold with Parallel
    Systems," *Datamation* 40, no. 22 (1994).

[^105]: Eva Freeman, "Datamining Unearths Dollars from
    Data," *Datamation* 43, no. 7 (1997).

[^106]: Vance McCarthy, "Strike It Rich!"

[^107]: Acker, "Toward a Hermeneutics of Data."

[^108]: Beer, "The Social Power of Algorithms."; "Envisioning the Power
    of Data Analytics."; Couldry and Yu, "Deconstructing Datafication's
    Brave New World."

[^109]: Puschmann and Burgess, "Big Data, Big Questions."

[^110]: Beer, "The Social Power of Algorithms," 7.

[^111]: Couldry and Yu, "Deconstructing Datafication's Brave New World."
