---
author: Andrew Piper
date: '12.20.16'
shortauthor: Andrew Piper
shorttitle: Fictionality
title: Fictionality
---

###### *Peer-Reviewed By: Adam Hammond*

###### *Clusters: [Genre](http://culturalanalytics.org/2016/05/genre/), [NovelTM Special Issue on Genre](http://culturalanalytics.org/2017/04/noveltm-special-issue-on-genre/)*

###### *Article DOI: [10.22148/16.011](https://doi.org/10.22148/16.011)*

###### *Dataverse DOI:  [10.7910/DVN/5WKTZV](http://dx.doi.org/10.7910/DVN/5WKTZV)*

 

> "There is no textual property, syntactical or semantic, that will
> identify a text as a work of fiction." - John Searle

The distinction between fiction and non-fiction, between a text that is
true and one that is not, is one of the oldest on record.[^1] Ever since
we have been thinking about the act of narration, we have addressed the
related meanings of truth and imagination. This is what Aristotle
designated as the difference between the communicative use of language
(*legein*) and its creative use (*poiein*).[^2] For millennia, we have
been debating whether there are inherent features of being fictional or
whether it is simply a matter of intention, that perhaps there is
nothing unique to the language of fictional discourse after all. How do
we know when a text is signalling that it is "true" or, by extension,
not true?[^3] And what might quantity have to tell us about this most
elementary of distinctions?

Consider for example the following two passages:

>                                                                      
>       A\
> On the short ferry ride from Buckley Bay to Denman Island, Juliet got
> out of her car and stood at the front of the boat, in the summer
> breeze. A woman standing there recognized her, and they began to talk.
> It is not unusual for people to take a second look at Juliet and
> wonder where they've seen her before, and sometimes, to remember.
>
>                                                                      
>       B\
> Jeff is 24, tall and fit, with shaggy brown hair and an easy smile.
> After graduating from Brown three years ago, with an honors degree in
> history and anthropology, he moved back home to the Boston suburbs and
> started looking for a job. After several months, he found one, as a
> sales representative for a small Internet provider. He stays in touch
> with friends from college by text message and email, and still heads
> downtown on weekends to hang out at Boston's "Brown bars." "It's kinda
> like I never left college," he says, with a mixture of resignation and
> pleasure. "Same friends, same aimlessness."

At first glance, these passages share a good deal in common. Both use
single proper names (Jeff / Juliet) and markers of place (Boston /
Denman Island). They each use a number of pronouns (her, they / he), an
occasional adjective (short ferry ride, summer breeze / shaggy brown
hair, easy smile), as well as the past and present tense (stood, began,
is / is, started, moved). While the second passage uses dialogue, it is
not unreasonable to assume that the first text might at some point, too.
And both passages seem to offer some kind of psychological underpinning
to the description, whether it is Jeff's malaise as a "sales rep" or the
woman who recognizes Juliet in the first passage. Both make claims on
our thinking about people and personality.

And yet few readers would have difficulty guessing that passage B is
from a work of non-fiction (Michael Kimmel's Guyland) and passage A from
a work of fiction (Alice Munro's "Silence"). What is it then that makes
this so obvious? We could say, as many in our field do, that
fictionality is simply ineffable, that it is a matter of a feeling we
get when we read. Who could say what conjures imaginary worlds in
readers' minds? Or, on the other hand, we could try to be more precise
than my initial description above and quantify as many features as
possible about these two passages in order to understand where their
salient differences lie at the lexical and syntactic level (Table 1).

**Table 1.** These results were generated using James Pennebaker's
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) software which explores textual
features across 80 different psycho-linguistic dimensions. Only a subset
of all features are presented. Values are in percentages.

  Feature   Kimmel   Munro   Difference (+/-)
  --------- -------- ------- ------------------
  verb      4,81     14,06   9,25
  funct     47,12    54,69   7,57
  present   1,92     7,81    5,89
  WPS       17,33    21,33   4
  social    8,65     12,5    3,85
  insight   0,96     4,69    3,73
  pronoun   5,77     9,38    3,61
  past      2,88     6,25    3,37
  they      0        3,12    3,12
  humans    0        3,12    3,12
  ppron     4,81     7,81    3
  motion    1,92     4,69    2,77
  article   6,73     9,38    2,65
  preps     19,23    21,88   2,65
  space     8,65     10,94   2,29
  tentat    0,96     3,12    2,16
  quant     2,88     0       -2,88
  bio       2,88     0       -2,88
  leisure   2,88     0       -2,88
  percept   6,73     3,12    -3,61
  incl      11,54    7,81    -3,73
  work      3,85     0       -3,85
  time      11,54    6,25    -5,29
  posemo    5,77     0       -5,77
  Quote     5,77     0       -5,77
  affect    6,73     0       -6,73
  Sixltr    21,15    10,94   -10,21

Looking at these passages in this way, we see not only a broader range
of differences between them, but also the strength, and presumably, the
significance of these differences. Munro's text now looks more verb-ish
than Kimmel's, with more present tense verbs relative to the overall
number of words. Her sentences are also somewhat longer, and more
pronoun heavy. She uses more articles and prepositions than Kimmel and
also vocabularies of insight ("recognize," "remember," "wonder"),
tentativeness ("sometimes," "wonder"), human-centeredness ("woman,"
"people"), and mobility ("car," "ride," "ferry," "boat"). Kimmel, on the
other hand, uses many more six-letter words, slightly more commas and
periods, more numbers, and a greater vocabulary of affect and work. We
might think the literary text would be more affective, but part of
Munro's art is submerging feelings so that they are more implicit than
explicit ("and wonder where they've seen her before, and sometimes, to
remember").

This article is about understanding the differences between fictional
and non-fictional texts, the signs that signal to readers when a story
is true or not-true. Rather than look at a single example as I have done
above, or even several of them, I will be using a collection of roughly
twenty-eight thousand documents, both fictional and non-fictional, to
better understand what distinguishes fictional writing from its
non-fictional counterpart. Much of my emphasis will focus on the novel
as one of the dominant forms of fictional writing from the nineteenth
century to the present. Beginning around 1800, when we know the novel
began its inexorable quantitative rise to prominence, what makes the
novel unique as a form of fictional discourse?[^4]

Questions about the nature of fictional speech reached something of a
high-point in the 1970s and early 80s, with numerous works in the
philosophy of language reflecting on the linguistic cues that marked out
a text's truth claims.[^5] At stake in this endeavor was an attempt to
define and thus potentially control for the reliability of language, the
ability to distinguish between the truthful and untruthful content of
speech. The work of John Searle became a landmark within this movement,
providing a framework that was deeply indebted to a theory of speech
acts inherited from J.L. Austin.

For Searle and the community of philosophers gathered around him, the
differences between fictional and non-fictional discourse did not depend
on the actual content of the speech. Instead, it depended on the
combined intentionality of the speaker and receiver, what were known as
illocutionary and perlocutionary acts. (We might think of these as
frameworks for producing and receiving speech.) As Searle writes, "The
utterance acts in fiction are indistingiushable from the utterance acts
of serious discourse, and it is for that reason that there is no textual
property that will identify a stretch of discourse as a work of
fiction."[^6] For the philosophers of language, fictionality was not a
distinct use of language, but depended on the intentions of both writers
and readers and the way those intentions were communicated beyond the
boundaries of a text.

For literary theorists of about the same time, literature, as a subset
of fictional discourse, similarly came to be defined as an
indistinguishable textual entity from the larger category of "writing."
Searle's and Austin's speech-act theory was used to generate a more
general critique of literary essentialism, that there were unique and
potentially timeless qualities to works of literature. As Jaques Derrida
wrote, explicitly invoking Searle's philosophy, "No exposition, no
discursive form is intrinsically or essentially literary before and
outside of the function it is assigned or recognized by a right, that
is, a specific intentionality inscribed directly on the social body."
Derrida would then continue, "This is the hypothesis I would like to
test and submit to your discussion. There is no essence or substance of
literature: literature is not. It does not exist."[^7] For Derrida and
much of the poststructural criticism that followed, literature was the
product not of a definable set of features, but a social set of
intentions, the frameworks of production and reception that underpinned
Searle's speech acts.[^8] Translating Searle's position on discursive
statements into literary interpretation more generally, literature was
seen as liberatory precisely because it was irreducible to any kind of
pattern, habit or idiolect.[^9]

This article makes a very different claim, one that is based on
observing a great deal of instances in which individuals have engaged in
fictional or non-fictional writing over the past two centuries. Seen
from this perspective, fictionality emerges as a highly legible category
at the level of linguistic content ("lexis" in Aristotelian
terminology). Such legibility is what allows us to build predictive
models that can identify works of fiction with greater than 95%
accuracy, and it should be added, that allow human readers to do the
same (as in my initial experiment above). Contrary to the beliefs of the
philosophers of language or different schools of literary critics from
poststructuralists to postclassical narratologists, truth claims in
language (or their opposite fictionality) are a highly recognizable
linguistic aspect of texts. What appeared to be the case at the level of
the sentence or "utterance" (what Searle rather vaguely called a
"stretch of discourse"), no longer holds when we observe writing at a
different level of scale.[^10] Placing all of the emphasis on the
reader's activity, whether as cognitive predisposition or interpretive
freedom, overlooks the powerful and extensive ways that texts mark
themselves for their readers according to their fictional nature.

Not only does the research here suggest that fictionality is a highly
legible category, but it also appears to have been surprisingly stable
for at least two hundred years. While there have undoubtedly been
significant changes to the way we tell stories, when we use learning
algorithms trained on nineteenth-century texts we can still recognize
contemporary novels with an impressive degree of accuracy (about 91%),
even if that performance does decrease (history still matters). Indeed,
the very features that seem to indicate the uniqueness of novels in the
nineteenth-century, for example, appear either to be increasing over
time or largely holding steady, even among a diverse range of genres
into the twentieth and twenty-first century. While it remains an open
question as to the extent to which different genres exhibit these
features of fictionality to a similar degree, my initial research
suggests that there is a surprising degree of commonality across very
diverse types of fictional writing. Such continuity has important and
still largely unaddressed implications for how we think about both genre
and literary periodization.[^11]

Understanding the legibility of fictionality - the extent to which it
marks itself off as a cultural practice - has important implications for
understanding our own disciplinary practices. Recent emphasis on the
historical imbeddedness of creative writing, however valuable, in many
ways misses the point of such coherence, the way one of the driving
concerns of fiction is to differentiate itself from other kinds of
writing. This is not to suggest that fiction is not in some basic sense
about the real world, but it does suggest that its center of gravity,
what Kleist called a work of art's Schwerpunkt in his essay on the
Marionette Theater, is located somewhere else. What I ultimately hope to
better understand here then is this center of gravity, the ways in which
fiction distinguishes itself as a kind of writing. As we will see,
fiction's stability, and the novel's in particular, appears to be based
on what we might call "phenomenological investment."[^12] The particular
nature of the novel's contribution to fictional discourse in the
nineteenth century (and beyond) has been its concern not simply with the
world around us, but our perceptual encounter with that world, one that
includes a great deal of skepticism, prevarication, and negation. To
experience the world in the novel is first and foremost to doubt.

To think about fictionality and the novel in these terms inevitably puts
pressure on some of the more common scholarly refrains of the recent
past. Longstanding questions about the novel's "realism," i.e. the
extent to which and the means through which a novel reproduces a given
environment, give way in this view to the novel's concerns with a
"dramatization of encounter" - both with others and with the world,
indeed, with otherness more broadly speaking. Rather than think of the
novel as a genre based on its relationship to a knowledge of things,
thing-theory serving here as a translation of the rise-of-realism into
new terms, according to its quantitatively meaningful components the
novel appears far more self-referential in nature, offering us access to
the knowledge of knowing. It renders explicit an experience of the
hypothetical, a testing relationship to the world.[^13] While this may
have traditionally been how we have thought about a small subset of
modernist experiments, it is significant that this insight holds even
across the most canonical "realist" novels of the nineteenth century.

This article thus suggests that certain canonical positions within the
history of novel scholarship need to be rethought or at least subject to
revision in light of an emerging computational understanding of the
novel. Whether it is Catherine Gallagher's argument about the novel's
ambiguous relationship to its own fictionality; the poststructural
investment in literature's negativity, as when critics speak of the
novel as the "genre of no genre"; thing-theory's emphasis on what Elaine
Freedgood has called the "denotative, literal, and technical" language
of the novel; or Ian Watt's still-influential position on the novel's
referentiality, as when he writes, "It would appear then that the
function of language is much more largely referential in the novel than
in other literary forms"; computation presents a very different portrait
of the novel's importance as a type of fictional discourse.[^14] The
point is not that these positions are unfounded - it is certain that for
some novels these ways of being may indeed be predominant just as it is
certain that for many novels these ways of being may be operative some
of the time.

But if we try to understand what makes the novel stand out from other
types of ostensibly true writing or even other types of fictional texts
- if we try to generalize about the novel as a genre - then at least
since the turn of the nineteenth century we are seeing something
altogether different at stake. According to the research I will present
here, the novel's mattering is not primarily grounded in its positive
representation of the world, that is, in its mimetic utility, its
ability to simulate something (as in seventeenth-century debates about
vraisemblance). Nor is it grounded in a kind of post-structural
negativity - the novel is unrecognizable as a distinct and stable
category, a reflection of literature's more general negative capability.
Rather, the novel can best be described through its investment in the
negation of the certainty of its own worldliness. It is grounded in an
appeal to encounter rather than reality. In doing so, it is precisely
the referentiality of language that is being bracketed in the novel, not
ambiguously, but programmatically, even in novels that are widely
considered to be the most realistic.

### **Prediction and Description** {#prediction-and-description style="text-align: center;"}

This article will be using a combination of what are called predictive
and descriptive methods. Predictive models, such as those employed in
the process of machine learning, are important because they allow us to
engage in the process of classification, of what it means to define a
group of texts as a coherent entity and to understand the degree of
coherence according to certain predefined conditions.[^15] Predictive
models allow us to say with how much certainty we can identify texts
that belong to a specific group and under what criteria. The more
certainty there is, the more cohesive the category is thought to be.

Descriptive models, on the other hand, are useful because they allow us
to qualify distinctive features of one group when compared with another
without engaging in the act of classification. They can tell us which
features are distinctive of one group versus another, but they do not do
so in order to make claims about the overall uniqueness of that group.
Instead of defining a text or group of texts - the novel is X or the
novel is this predictable - these qualities help describe the behavior
of a group according to more individualized criteria. This too is
valuable because it allows us to understand the components that make one
group different from another but that do not necessarily lead to
categorical difference. Explaining predictions - how a computer arrived
at an estimate about which class a text belongs to - is quite
challenging. Explaining individual differences is far more
straightforward. It is their combination, I would argue, that allows us
to think both categorically - about the relative coherence of writing
under certain conditions - as well as qualitatively about the specific
aspects of writing regardless of drawing definitive boundaries around
things. Description is in many ways much closer to the traditional task
of literary criticism than prediction.

The data that I will be using for this article has been selected to
understand the nature of fictionality across different types of
writing.[^16] The aim is to see if the results here hold across time,
different languages, and different sample sizes. Overall, the data
consist of \~28,000 documents, dating from the late eighteenth century
to the early twenty first written in both English and German. The
collections contain different kinds of fictional and non-fictional
writing, including novels, histories, philosophy, advice books,
novellas, fairy tales, and classical epics translated into prose among
other kinds of writing (though not including encyclopedias or
cook-books). Together, the texts can be grouped into four principal
categories.

The first collection represents a canonical set of nineteenth-century
writing of \~600 documents in both German and English curated by my lab.
These include the best-known novels from the period as well as
well-known non-fiction, including philosophy, essays and histories.
These texts have been sufficiently cleaned so that they are subject to
minimal transcription errors and also broken out by point of view so
that we can control, for example, for third person novels when comparing
to historical narratives.

The second collection is a much larger sample of nineteenth century
writing in English consisting of 21,158 documents, both fictional and
non-fictional, that are drawn from Ted Underwood's research using the
Hathi Trust archives.[^17] This group, whose contents are much less well
understood, allows us to test our results between a canonical subset and
a much broader group of writing from the same period. The third
component consists of a collection of \~6,500 novels drawn from both the
Stanford Literary Lab's nineteenth-century novel collection and the
Chicago Text Lab's collection of twentieth-century novels. Together,
these collections allow us to examine diachronic shifts in the novel's
vocabulary. Finally, the fourth component consists of a collection of
800 contemporary novels and non-fiction published within the past decade
curated by my lab.[^18] This gives us some traction on the extent to
which the effects we are seeing in the past continue to hold in the
present. Table 2 provides an overview of the different components that
will be used and the respective number of documents.

**Table 2. Data Overview**

  Collection          Key             Description                        \# Documents
  ------------------- --------------- ---------------------------------- --------------
                      EN\_FIC         English Fiction                    100
                      EN\_NOV         English Novels                     100
                      EN\_NOV\_3P     Eng. Novels 3-Person               107
  19C Canon           EN\_NON         English Non-Fiction                100
                      EN\_HIST        English Histories                  85
                      DE\_NOV         German Novels                      100
                      DE\_NOV\_3P     Ger. Novels 3-Person               110
                      DE\_NON         German Non-Fiction                 100
                      DE\_HIST        German Histories                   75
                                                                         
                      HATHI\_FIC      Hathi Trust Fiction                9,426
  Hathi Trust (19C)   HATHI\_NON      Hathi Trust Non-Fiction            11,732
                      HATHI\_TALES    Hathi Trust Fiction Minus Novels   428
                                                                         
  1790-1990           STAN\_KLAB      English Novels                     6,421
                                                                         
                      CONT\_NOV       Contemporary Novels                200
  Contemporary        CONT\_NOV\_3P   Cont. Novels 3-Person              210
                      CONT\_NON       Contemporary Non-Fiction           200
                      CONT\_HIST      Contemporary Histories             200

 

The features that I will be exploring will be drawn largely from the
LIWC software designed by James Pennebaker. For those not familiar with
LIWC, it is a tool developed in the social sciences for studying large
text collections. It consists of eighty different features that range
from the identification of syntactic and grammatical features like the
use of punctuation, prepositions, verb tense, and pronouns to
higher-level cognitive phenomena like social, perceptual, or emotional
processes.[^19] These are dictionaries that have been tested and
validated on human subjects, the results of which are available for
review.[^20] As with all lexicon-based approaches, there are open
questions as to the semantic coherence of a given category. Are all of
the words in the "insight" dictionary really indicative of moments of
cognitive insight in novels? Or do all instances of "I" mean the same
thing?[^21] The interpretation of these results thus needs to be handled
with a good deal of caution. In particular, care needs to be taken in
how the categories are understood as categories, with emphasis given to
assessing the semantic coherence of these categories within the novels.
When we drill down into the individual features, what do we find? As we
will see, much of my emphasis will be on the less semantically ambiguous
categories, from punctuation and pronouns to verbs of sensory experience
or cognitive prevarication.

At the same time, it is also important to emphasize the benefits of such
lexicon-building approaches for the computational study of literature.
Unlike the problems faced by topic modeling or word embeddings, where
collections of words are discovered and labels applied after the fact,
here we start with prior assumptions about linguistic categories and
test their presence within given text collections. The externality of
the words from the collections they are meant to study allows one to
test beliefs independently of the collections themselves. While neither
approach is perfect, in both cases we are moving between individual
words and the ideas those words are thought to embody. What is
ultimately at stake is the confidence of a model to approximate some
underlying textual phenomenon.[^22] The key is making as explicit as
possible how we move between these different levels of analytical scale,
that is, how we connect the conceptual, the lexical, and the
theoretical.

LIWC can thus give us an initial range of intuitively meaningful
interpretive categories to build on as well as the lexica upon which
those categories may in part be based. One of its principle advantages
is that the feature sets can be shared even on proprietary data, as I
have done here. Nevertheless, the categories should not be taken at face
value, but looked into, as with all semantic fields. Because the
dictionaries are transparent in LIWC, users can refine or alter the
dictionaries as they see fit, as I have done on occasion here.[^23] They
can also be combined with other, more customized features, as I have
also done here, for example by looking at word classes using a tool like
WordNet. While future work will want to continue to expand and refine
these kinds of feature sets, the LIWC collection can serve as a useful
starting point for any supervised approach to understanding the
quantitative dimensions of texts.

### **The Coherence of Fictionality** {#the-coherence-of-fictionality style="text-align: center;"}

The question that I want to begin with is, How coherent is fiction as a
type of writing? Are there indeed no syntactic or semantic properties,
as Searle contends, that allow us to predict whether something is
intended fictionally? Is fictionality exclusively a function of
communicative context, the intentionality of the writer and the
belief-system of the reader? Or are there features that appear with a
high degree of regularity in fictional texts that do not appear in
non-fiction such that even a computer can make accurate guesses as to
the nature of the text?

In order to answer these questions, I will use the process known as
machine learning to see how accurately a computer can predict a text's
given class (I will be using the learning algorithm known as a support
vector machine (SVM), which is applied in many text classification
scenarios).[^24] For those not familiar with this process, a learning
algorithm is "trained" on features found in a set of documents for which
the classes are already known and then asked to predict which class a
group of texts belong to that it has not seen. In this case, I train the
algorithm using the LIWC features discovered in a given set of documents
and use a process of 10-fold cross-validation to make predictions on
whether a document is a work of fiction or non-fiction. What this means
in practice is that I randomly divide the corpus into a 90-10 split ten
times, where 90% of the documents are used to train the algorithm and
the unseen 10% are used to test its reliability. (The folds function in
the kernlab package ensures that the folds are equally balanced between
the two categories.) Doing this 10 times allows us to gain a full view
of all of the documents in the collection as each document has an
opportunity to be in the test set. Table 3 presents the results of this
experiment, showing which two data sets were compared and the average
accuracy score of the predictions on the unseen data.

As we can see in Table 3, not only are the differences between fiction
and non-fiction robust across time and languages, but we can use models
built in one time period to strongly predict those of another. While
there is a clear drop in performance when we use nineteenth-century
models to predict twenty-first-century novels, we can still see a
relatively high degree of performance at work here (around 91%
accuracy). There appears to be a notable degree of diachronic stability
to fictional discourse over the past two centuries. Indeed, as we will
see below, when we examine features that are more indicative of
novelistic writing in particular as a subset of fictional discourse, we
generally see these features increase over time. The trans-temporal
stability of the novel is complemented by an increase in certain types
of novel-specific vocabulary that can be traced back to the nineteenth
century.

**Table 3. The Predictability of Fiction**

  Corpus1                          Corpus2                     Accuracy (F1)   No. Docs
  -------------------------------- --------------------------- --------------- ------------
  Fiction (EN\_FIC)                Non-Fiction (EN\_NON)       0,94            100/100
  English Novel (EN\_NOV)          Non-Fiction (EN\_NON)       0,96            100/100
  German Novel (DE\_NOV)           Non-Fiction (DE\_NON)       0,95            100/100
  English Novel 3P (EN\_NOV\_3P)   History (EN\_HIST)          0,99            95/86
  Germ Novel 3P (DE\_NOV\_3P)      History (DE\_HIST)          0,99            88/75
  Cont. Novel (CONT\_NOV)          Non-Fiction (CONT\_NON)     0,96            193/200
  Cont. Novel 3P (CONT\_NOV\_3P)   History (CONT\_HIST)        0,99            210/200
  19C Fiction (HATHI) (Trained)    20C Novel (CONT) (Tested)   0,91            20,344/393

*This table presents the results of classification tests using an SVM
classifier with the LIWC feature set. In the final example, I trained
the classifier on the fiction and non-fiction of the Hathi Trust data
set and then ran it against the collection of contemporary novels
reviewed in the New York Times and popular contemporary non-fiction.*

### **The Phenomenology of the Novel** {#the-phenomenology-of-the-novel style="text-align: center;"}

If fiction is so predictable, what are the features or combinations of
features that make it so? While there are many ways one might want to
approach this question, here I rank features by the increase of their
median frequency in fiction versus non-fiction and use a non-parametric
Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test to indicate statistical significance. The value
of comparing medians is that it preserves information about the overall
distribution of a feature in a given sample. Rather than lump all works
of fiction together into a single bin, where some works may have
significantly higher amounts of a feature than others and thus skew the
results in their favor, the median identifies the mid-point of a given
category. Second, where some significance tests are designed to avoid
the importance of lower-frequency features, this test does not make that
assumption. It looks exclusively at the ratio between the two
populations to understand how much more frequent a given feature is
relative to its overall occurrence. Low-occurring features that increase
a great deal are thus considered more important than high-occurring
features that increase by a smaller amount.[^25]

To begin, let me review the overall structure of the tables used here to
better understand what they can and cannot tell us (Table 4). The left
most column ("Feature") lists the features as defined by LIWC. Some are
extremely straightforward ("exclamation" refers to the percentage of
exclamation marks), while others are more nuanced. "Family," for
example, refers to a dictionary of words all related to family members,
while "social" relates to words having to do with social experience,
which for example can include pronouns (a choice that effectively
duplicates the pronouns categories because they are so much more common
than other words). The former is arguably much more straightforward than
the latter and thus we need to be cautious when we encounter a
dictionary that is more semantically ambiguous (though even a single
word like "you" may have different kinds of functions in novels). The
second column ("Category") lists the category to which the feature
belongs, a slightly more general framework for understanding the
individual features. The next two columns (Fiction %, Non-Fiction %)
present the median frequency of that feature in each corpus as a
percentage of all words. This allows us to see which features are more
prevalent relative to other features.

Because percentages are somewhat opaque in terms of a reader's
experience, I will generally be translating these numbers into page and
work equivalents in the discussion that follows. This allows us to
imagine our way into a reader's experience and surmise which features
occupy more of a reader's attention. Exclamation marks, for example,
comprise on average about .45% of a given work of fiction in the
nineteenth century. If we assume an average novel length of about
100,000 words (or 500 words per page across 200 pages), this means that
there is one exclamation mark for about every 200 words, or 2-3 per
page, or roughly 500 total per novel. Personal pronouns, on the other
hand, occur about 10% of the time in fiction, which means once every 10
words, or 50 times per page (and 10,000 times per novel).

The fifth column, "Ratio," lets us see how much more prevalent the
feature is in one collection over another. Exclamation marks appear
almost ten times as often in fiction than in non-fiction. This is a
massive difference, but we are still only talking about something that
occurs relatively infrequently compared to other features. Personal
pronouns, on the other hand, only appear a little more than two-times
more often in fiction (still a very large difference), but this increase
is based on a much larger linguistic aspect of texts. Two times as many
pronouns means roughly 5,000 more pronouns per work or about 25 more per
page. While I privilege ratio here in my interpretation of the results,
we will want to keep our eye on both of these aspects, from the overall
prevalence of the feature to the relative increase from one population
to another.

Beginning with the baseline comparison of fiction and non-fiction
writing using both our canonical sample and the larger collection of
Hathi Trust writings from the nineteenth century (Table 4), we see how
the features that are most indicative of fictionality are driven by
dialogue - exclamation marks, question marks, quotation marks, first and
second person pronouns like "I" and "you," assent words like "yes,"
"okay," and "oh," and finally the word "said" (which is labeled as an
auditory verb by LIWC).

Importantly, we also see very strong alignment between the
nineteenth-century sample and the larger population of Hathi Trust
documents, with some notable exceptions around the "social" category and
potentially "family," "home," and "ingestion." If we compare these
groups directly, we see that only "family" and "ingestion" are somewhat
inflated in the canonical sample (by about 10-15%).[^26] In other words,
while there are interesting variations that are worth exploring, on the
whole, the smaller sample does a good job of capturing the same
information as the larger collection. Taken together, these features
suggest a relatively unambiguous way in which fictional writing has a
uniquely dialogical construction when compared with non-fiction. While
this may not be "news," it does help us build a taxononomy of the
distinctions that make this kind of writing socially significant.
Imagining people talking to each other appears to be one of fiction's
primary cultural functions.

**Table 4. Fiction v. Non-Fiction**\
19C Canon (English)

  Feature   Category     Fiction   Non-Fiction (%)   Ratio   Sample rank   Hathi rank   p-value
  --------- ------------ --------- ----------------- ------- ------------- ------------ ---------
  exclam    linguistic   0,4       0,04              10      1             2            \*\*\*
  you       linguistic   1,34      0,16              8,34    2             1            \*\*\*
  q-mark    linguistic   0,41      0,08              5,13    3             6            \*\*\*
  I         linguistic   2,41      0,49              4,92    4             7            \*\*\*
  quote     linguistic   2,59      0,65              3,98    5             5            \*\*\*
  assent    social       0,12      0,03              3,83    6             4            \*\*\*
  family    social       0,56      0,16              3,58    7             10           \*\*\*
  hear      perception   1,15      0,38              3,01    8             9            \*\*\*
  shehe     linguistic   4,86      1,9               2,56    9             8            \*\*\*
  ppron     linguistic   10,73     5,01              2,14    10            14           \*\*\*
  body      biological   1,12      0,55              2,06    11            15           \*\*\*
  home      social       0,57      0,28              2,02    12            19           \*\*\*
  friend    social       0,19      0,1               2       13            11           \*\*\*
  sexual    social       0,18      0,09              2       14            12           \*\*\*
  see       perception   1,15      0,59              1,94    15            13           \*\*\*
  percept   perception   3,03      1,61              1,88    16            16           \*\*\*
  past      linguistic   6,11      3,37              1,82    17            20           \*\*\*
  feel      perception   0,66      0,39              1,68    18            18           \*\*\*
  social    social       13,25     8,05              1,65    19            33           \*\*\*
  ingest    biological   0,29      0,18              1,61    20            31           \*\*\*

*The top twenty features with the greatest increase in fiction compared
to non-fiction. Values represent median percentage for a given feature.
The following code is used to represent p-values: \< 0.0001 = \*\*\*, \<
0.001 = \*\*, \< 0.01 = \*.*

Indeed, imagining people as people may be fiction's most important role.
If we remove dialogue from the sets above, including the pronominal
expressions that accompany them (she said, he cried, etc),[^27] we see
how third-person pronouns emerge as one of the strongest indicators of
fictionality along with references to family members and bodies (Table
5). There is over a three-fold increase in the average number of she/he
pronouns in fiction versus non-fiction outside of dialogue, with just
these two words alone accounting for more than five-percent of all words
in the text (or roughly 5,000 instances for a medium-length novel).

This is especially remarkable considering that on average works of
history, for example, use considerably more proper names than works of
fiction (an estimated more than 2x as many).[^28] The lower number of
people in fiction is compensated for by a more expanded durational
existence on the page for which pronouns become key linguistic markers.
People seem to have more extended identities in fiction, though this is
not necessarily to be confused with a more "expansive" identity, i.e.,
one that is more semantically rich. The pronominal frequency of
characters is not the same as the linguistic diversity surrounding these
characters. Nevertheless, this gives us a first indication of the ways
in which fiction performs the process of identification as a repetitive
and extensive act of naming the same person.

The prevalence of family and friend vocabulary in fiction also suggests
what type of people are more distinctive of the genre, just as the
setting of home gives us an idea of where they are most active. Broadly
speaking, when we read fiction in the nineteenth century, what is novel,
i.e. different from other kinds of texts that purport to be about real
things, is a focus on family and the familiar. Travel, adventure, work -
these can be experienced elsewhere in ways that documentation of family
life and the extended agency of individuals cannot.

**Table 5. Fiction v. Non-Fiction with Dialogue Removed**\
19C Canon (English)

  Feature   Category     Fiction (%)   Non-Fiction (%)   Ratio   p-value
  --------- ------------ ------------- ----------------- ------- ---------
  family    social       0,53          0,15              3,53    \*\*\*
  exclam    linguistic   0,07          0,02              3,5     \*\*\*
  shehe     linguistic   5,92          1,92              3,09    \*\*\*
  body      biological   1,28          0,5               2,56    \*\*\*
  home      social       0,71          0,29              2,43    \*\*\*
  sexual    social       0,18          0,08              2,19    \*\*\*
  see       perceptual   1,26          0,59              2,14    \*\*\*
  hear      perceptual   0,65          0,31              2,13    \*\*\*
  past      linguistic   6,49          3,11              2,09    \*\*\*
  feel      perceptual   0,77          0,37              2,07    \*\*\*
  friend    social       0,18          0,1               1,89    \*\*\*
  percept   perceptual   2,81          1,49              1,89    \*\*\*
  anx       affective    0,47          0,26              1,81    \*\*\*
  ppron     linguistic   8,73          4,9               1,78    \*\*\*
  bio       biological   2,23          1,27              1,76    \*\*\*
  ingest    biological   0,3           0,18              1,67    \*\*\*
  social    social       11,81         7,69              1,54    \*\*\*
  sad       affective    0,6           0,39              1,53    \*\*\*
  motion    relative     2,23          1,49              1,5     \*\*\*
  assent    oral         0,03          0,02              1,5     \*\*\*

The stakes of this attention will become even clearer when we focus on a
particular type of fiction (novels with external narrators) and a
particular type of non-fiction (history writing) across both German and
English text collections as well as across historical and contemporary
data sets (Tables 6-8). What rises to the top here are a host of
perceptual categories (seeing, hearing, feeling) that construct the
phenomonological reality of an experiencing individual. And the greater
prevalence of body words gives us an indication of where that attention
most often lies. It is knowledge, not just of otherness, but of another
embodied individual that most consistently frames the epistemological
horizon of the novel from a quantitative point of view. This result
poses an interesting challenge for "theory of mind" approaches that
argue that fiction's primary purpose is the enactment of another human
consciousness.[^29] While we will see an area where this hypothesis does
make sense in the next test, in terms of understanding the novel's
distinctive fictional qualities the mind-body distinction that underlies
theory of mind models does not hold up well in light of the novel's
strong emphasis on sensorial input and embodied entities. The sensual
experience of a sensing being: this is what appears to be uniquely
reiterated in the imaginative work of novelistic writing when compared
to its non-fictional counterpart.

**Table 6. Third Person Novels v. History**

(English 19C, Dialogue Removed)

  Feature   Category     3P Novels (%)   History (%)   Ratio   p-value
  --------- ------------ --------------- ------------- ------- ---------
  exclam    linguistic   0,08            0,02          4       \*\*\*
  hear      perception   0,67            0,19          3,53    \*\*\*
  see       perception   1,3             0,37          3,51    \*\*\*
  feel      perception   0,84            0,26          3,21    \*\*\*
  percept   perception   2,95            0,92          3,2     \*\*\*
  shehe     linguistic   6,95            2,25          3,09    \*\*\*
  body      biological   1,27            0,41          3,09    \*\*\*
  sexual    biological   0,19            0,06          3,08    \*\*\*
  assent    oral         0,03            0,01          3       \*\*\*
  qmark     linguistic   0,09            0,03          3       \*\*\*
  home      social       0,73            0,26          2,84    \*\*\*
  anx       affective    0,56            0,24          2,38    \*\*\*
  bio       biological   2,25            0,98          2,3     \*\*\*
  ingest    biological   0,3             0,14          2,14    \*\*\*
  ppron     linguistic   8,42            4,17          2,02    \*\*\*
  sad       affective    0,69            0,36          1,92    \*\*\*
  friend    social       0,17            0,09          1,89    \*\*\*
  family    social       0,45            0,26          1,75    \*\*\*
  discrep   cognitive    1,27            0,74          1,72    \*\*\*
  social    social       12,04           7             1,72    \*\*\*

**Table 7. Third Person Novels v. History**\
(German 19C, No Dialogue Removed)

  Feature    Category     3P Novels (%)   History (%)   Ratio   p-value
  ---------- ------------ --------------- ------------- ------- ---------
  I          linguistic   2,16            0,09          24      \*\*\*
  exclam     linguistic   0,57            0,04          14,13   \*\*\*
  self       linguistic   2,61            0,32          8,16    \*\*\*
  qmark      linguistic   0,46            0,06          7,67    \*\*\*
  sexual     biological   0,17            0,03          5,67    \*\*\*
  posfeel    affective    0,43            0,08          5,38    \*\*\*
  see        perception   0,2             0,04          5       \*\*\*
  senses     perception   0,29            0,07          4,07    \*\*\*
  friends    social       0,31            0,08          3,81    \*\*\*
  sleep      biological   0,11            0,03          3,5     \*\*\*
  physical   biological   1,72            0,49          3,5     \*\*\*
  you        linguistic   2,07            0,64          3,23    \*\*\*
  body       biological   1,32            0,41          3,22    \*\*\*
  assent     oral         0,16            0,05          3,2     \*\*\*
  hear       perception   0,03            0,01          3       \*\*\*
  humans     social       0,75            0,27          2,76    \*\*\*
  pronoun    linguistic   11,14           4,05          2,75    \*\*\*
  othref     linguistic   9,31            4,42          2,11    \*\*\*
  we         linguistic   0,4             0,19          2,11    \*\*\*
  family     social       0,72            0,35          2,06    \*\*\*

**Table 8. Third Person Novels v. History**\
(English Contemporary, Dialogue Removed)

  Feature   Category     3P Novels (%)   History (%)   Ratio   P-Value
  --------- ------------ --------------- ------------- ------- ---------
  you       linguistic   0,20            0,03          6,67    \*\*\*
  body      biological   1,84            0,41          4,48    \*\*\*
  qmark     linguistic   0,21            0,05          4,2     \*\*\*
  shehe     linguistic   6,87            2,07          3,32    \*\*\*
  feel      perceptual   1,12            0,34          3,28    \*\*\*
  ingest    biological   0,59            0,2           2,93    \*\*\*
  hear      perceptual   0,7             0,24          2,92    \*\*\*
  percept   perceptual   3,64            1,28          2,84    \*\*\*
  bio       biological   3,1             1,12          2,76    \*\*\*
  see       perceptual   1,44            0,56          2,57    \*\*\*
  home      social       0,94            0,37          2,56    \*\*\*
  assent    oral         0,05            0,02          2,5     \*\*\*
  ppron     linguistic   9,05            3,84          2,36    \*\*\*
  sexual    biological   0,18            0,08          2,25    \*\*\*
  I         linguistic   0,18            0,09          1,94    \*\*\*
  family    social       0,47            0,26          1,81    \*\*\*
  pronoun   linguistic   13,13           7,6           1,73    \*\*\*
  social    social       12,33           7,25          1,7     \*\*\*
  present   linguistic   2,13            1,47          1,45    \*\*\*
  period    linguistic   6,64            4,66          1,43    \*\*\*

As a final way to understand, and bring into sharper relief, the
significance of what I am calling the phenomenological orientation of
the novel, I compare the nineteenth century novel with a particular
subset of fiction that excludes novels published during the same time
period (HATHI\_TALES). Non-novelistic fiction in this case refers to a
broad mixture of fictional writing that would have been very present to
nineteenth-century readers, including classical epics translated into
prose (*The Iliad, Odyssey, Edda, Nibelungenlied*), classic works of
prose fiction (*The Tale of Genji, The Decameron*, King Arthur Tales,
and Rabelais), fairy tale collections from around the world (drawn from
Irish, German, Danish, Japanese and Indian sources), contemporary
novella collections (novellas by Hoffmann, Tolstoy, Dickens, Maupassant,
Hawthorne, and Washington Irving), as well as a variety of "tales"
collections (*Tales of Former Times, Tales of Domestic Life, Moral
Tales*). This data set is meant to represent a range of prose fiction
that would have been widely read and known to nineteenth-century
anglophone readers but would not have been considered a "novel." While
the material dates from different epochs, the publications (and
translations) are all contemporaneous with the period as a whole.

**Table 9. Novels v. Other Fiction**

  Feature   Category     Novel (%)   Other Fiction (%)   Ratio   P-Value
  --------- ------------ ----------- ------------------- ------- ---------
  qmark     linguistic   0,54        0,33                1,65    \*\*\*
  assent    oral         0,17        0,11                1,57    \*\*
  period    linguistic   4,92        3,82                1,29    \*\*\*
  present   linguistic   4,45        3,52                1,27    \*\*\*
  discrep   cognitive    1,61        1,31                1,23    \*\*\*
  shehe     linguistic   5,82        4,92                1,18    \*
  negate    cognitive    1,68        1,43                1,18    \*\*\*
  see       perception   1,16        1                   1,16    \*
  verb      linguistic   12,91       11,17               1,16    \*\*\*
  percept   perception   3,14        2,74                1,15    \*\*
  hear      perception   1,12        0,98                1,14    \*
  insight   cognitive    2,15        1,9                 1,13    \*\*
  tentat    cognitive    2,27        2,01                1,13    \*\*
  auxverb   linguistic   7,78        6,93                1,12    \*\*\*
  past      linguistic   6,2         5,54                1,12    \*
  feel      perception   0,68        0,61                1,11    ,
  future    linguistic   1,2         1,09                1,1     \*
  adverb    linguistic   3,74        3,41                1,1     \*
  excl      cognitive    2,26        2,09                1,08    \*
  social    social       13,29       12,37               1,07    \*

Three interesting features initially stand out in this table. First, the
ratios are much lower when compared with non-fiction. While these groups
are similarly well-differentiated when compared to non-fiction, when
compared to each other the overall distinctiveness drops considerably.
If we run the same classifier as above, we can predict novels with about
68% accuracy, which is close to the threshold of statistical
significance (p=0.018). If we use a slightly larger collection of novels
from the Hathi Trust collection (428 to mirror "other fiction"),
accuracy will increase slightly to 74% (p=7.23e-05). This is still
considerably lower for example than the ability to predict novels from
different genres. As Ted Underwood has shown, it is possible to predict
detective fiction and science fiction across a 150-year span with
between 88-90% accuracy.[^30] The broad category of "other fiction" then
is not highly differentiated from novels as a subset of fiction.

Second, while we see some of our more familiar linguistic fictional
markers such as pronouns and dialogue, we also see a new feature in the
category of verbs. There are more verbs overall as well as more varied
tenses (past, future, present, in addition to auxiliary verbs). In other
words, there appears to be greater temporal complexity to novels than
can be found in fiction more generally. While this deserves its own
study, it suggests an initial insight into one of the key ways that
novels differentiate themselves from other kinds of imaginary writing in
the nineteenth century.[^31]

Finally, we also see a new category emerge here that we have not seen
before, one that falls under the heading of "cognitive process." These
are the dictionaries that LIWC labels "discrepancy," "negation,"
"tentativeness," and "insight." If we examine the words in those
dictionaries that are most distinctive of novels (and here I rank by
log-likelihood ratio), we can see the extent to which these are words
that tend to mark out moments of self-reflection, doubt, and hesitation,
a kind of testing-relationship to the world.[^32]

Modal verbs in particular are extremely prevalent here, could, would,
must, might, and should, as well as their negative contractions, and so
too is the act of negation more generally (don't, can't, didn't, not,
never, nobody). As the presence of "if" suggests, these groups offer
different ways of expressing conditionality or even impossibility. At
the same time, indefinite words such as something, somebody, anything
and anybody are more prevalent, along with a more specific vocabulary of
hesitation (perhaps, chance, hope, possibly, guess, maybe, doubt,
uncertain). In between the conditional and the impossible language of
the novel, there lies a considerable amount of potentiality - chance,
but also skepticism.[^33]

Finally, we see how novels are marked by a much stronger use of mental
states, captured in major verbs such as know, feel, think, remember, and
believe, along with a second layer of less frequent, but similarly
distinctive complex cognitive verbs such as admit, ponder, imagine, and
forgive (the latter not shown). This is the ground of the novel's
reflectiveness, that which binds together doubt and conditionality into
a consistent mental state. Indeed, the combination of seem and feel,
both of which appear 30% more often in the novel, give us a particular
indication of what I am calling the novel's phenomenological
orientation. Not the world itself, but a person's encounter with and
reflection upon that world - the world's feltness - is what marks out
the unique terrain of novelistic discourse when compared with other
forms of classical fiction. It is this combination of sense perception
plus cognitive skepticism that seems to bring out the novel's
contribution to fictional discourse. The novel professes its uniqueness
in the way it offers extended reading experiences of the human
assessment of the world's givenness.[^34]

**Table 10. Novels v. Other Fiction - Distinctive Vocabulary**

  Discrepancy   Frequency (per 100K)   G2        Ratio   Insight      Frequency (per 100K)   G2        Ratio
  ------------- ---------------------- --------- ------- ------------ ---------------------- --------- -------
  want          84,11                  2086,73   1,77    think        154,93                 3241,93   1,68
  would         348,14                 1534,14   1,25    know         183,74                 1564,75   1,38
  if            315,85                 1213,5    1,23    realiz       5,41                   1524,74   31,53
  wouldnt       13,15                  978,85    3,02    thought      139,88                 801,93    1,29
  could         246,67                 738,47    1,2     seem         120,01                 730,36    1,31
  couldnt       10,73                  683,5     2,72    felt         64,81                  557,08    1,38
  shouldnt      5,09                   638,09    4,86    sens         31,39                  547,27    1,6
  rather        51,37                  472,47    1,39    feel         86,05                  483,08    1,29
  must          131,82                 439,63    1,21    meant        15,03                  465,98    1,92
  mustnt        2,58                   386,01    6,1     recogn       3,78                   434,78    4,42
  hope          68,91                  362,06    1,28    conscious    18,16                  422,69    1,74
  ought         23,95                  292,34    1,47    rememb       38,16                  413,15    1,44
  neednt        2,5                    268,92    4,12    believ       57,45                  369,91    1,32
  should        148,47                 175,96    1,12    idea         30,27                  331,38    1,44
  ideal         3,36                   149,13    2,23    knew         65,63                  318,91    1,27
  wish          65,77                  142,12    1,17    question     36,44                  267,27    1,34
  normal        0,85                   136,66    6,74    understand   28,38                  235,23    1,37
  problem       1,99                   112,16    2,53    decid        14,48                  197,34    1,51
  oughtnt       0,72                   105       5,9     mean         64,27                  162,91    1,18
  need          28,78                  99,08     1,22    percept      3,82                   122,36    1,94
                                                                                                       
  Negation      Frequency (per 100K)   G2        Ratio   Tentative    Frequency (per 100K)   G2        Ratio
  dont          107,1                  6643,46   2,68    like         195,81                 1262,54   1,32
  cant          34,32                  2369,73   2,87    someth       62,9                   1091,98   1,6
  isnt          13,82                  1375,74   3,83    quit         74,78                  1003,91   1,5
  didnt         21,55                  1322,7    2,66    ani          162,81                 829,51    1,27
  doesnt        8,48                   961,32    4,35    anyth        43,52                  527,88    1,47
  havent        7,74                   834,73    4,13    vagu         8,38                   470,24    2,52
  wont          24,89                  747,67    1,89    suppos       38                     391,83    1,42
  not           715,73                 559,28    1,1     hope         68,91                  362,06    1,28
  never         149,5                  414,82    1,19    almost       51,55                  357,66    1,33
  arent         2,41                   378,8     6,56    hard         45,05                  317,18    1,33
  shant         3,19                   376,61    4,55    perhap       48,76                  311,51    1,31
  no            332,1                  341,8     1,11    sort         28,85                  308,24    1,43
  hadnt         5,22                   324,28    2,68    might        118,27                 269,19    1,17
  wasnt         6,94                   294,65    2,19    question     36,44                  267,27    1,34
  noth          86                     268,27    1,21    guess        11,43                  242,72    1,69
  hasnt         2,51                   233,4     3,6     possibl      36,26                  180,39    1,27
  werent        1,25                   157,7     4,91    somehow      5,94                   179,07    1,9
  aint          6,25                   58,15     1,4     chanc        19,99                  142,57    1,34
  nobody        10,45                  49,32     1,26    anybodi      7,05                   141,16    1,66
  negat         1,25                   44,62     2,03    anyon        3,27                   116,36    2,02
                                                                                                       

 

### **The Question of the Novel's Realism** {#the-question-of-the-novels-realism style="text-align: center;"}

If we can agree that one of the ways the novel distinguishes itself as a
genre is through a more intensive attention to a phenomenological
vocabulary, the question arises as to whether such attention is also
accompanied by a greater degree of world-focusedness, that is, more
attention to reality or what I would more abstractly describe as
"givenness" following Lukacs. Are the phenomenological and the realistic
mutually exclusive of one another or mutually constitutive? Can we test,
in other words, the longstanding hypothesis of the novel's heightened
realism?

While these are questions that deserve their own study, I offer two
tests here that attempt to gain some insight into the validity of the
novel's realistic tendencies. In my first test, I explore the novel's
relative attention to abstraction versus physical entities. To do so, I
compare a subset of nineteenth-century novels from the Chadwyck Healey
collection (about 700 novels) with my "other fiction" from the Hathi
Trust and translate these collections into their respective hypernym
trees using Wordnet.[^35] Hypernyms provide higher-order classifications
of nouns ("furniture" is a hypernym of "chair," for example) and can
allow us to see whether particular categories are more present than
others in a given corpus, much in the way LIWC does for emotional and
psychological processes. So for example, if the word "marsh" appears in
a novel, this would be translated into "wetland," "land," "ground,"
"soil," "object," "physical\_object," "physical\_entity," and "entity."
All nouns in this case are "entities," while their first order of
distinction is between those nouns that are "physical," like a marsh,
and those that are abstract, like "death."

The question that this model allows us to pose is whether novels exhibit
significantly higher amounts of physical entities when compared with
other kinds of classical fiction (or histories for that matter). By
doing so, we can gain confidence as to whether the novel's uniqueness is
tied to its physical objectivity, one potential way of understanding its
degree of realism, or whether it hinges more on abstract mental or
emotional states.

The second test attempts to understand realism as a greater amount of
specificity. The more specific a text is, the more focused it is on the
world around it. To test this, I compare the percentage of words in one
text that are hypernyms of another text's words (and vice versa). The
more words from one group that are hypernyms of words from another, the
more abstract that first group can be said to be and the more specific
the second group. For example, if I use the word "marsh" and you use the
word "land," then my language can be said to be more specific than yours
(and yours more abstract than mine). Unlike in my first test, where
having more objects in a text is a way of thinking about an attention to
realism, here the emphasis is on measuring a greater degree of
specificity as a marker of the real.

The results suggest that the novel's relationship to its concreteness,
when measured in this way, has indeed been changing over the course of
the nineteenth century (Table 11).[^36] If we look at the first half of
the nineteenth century, we see how there is a greater degree of
abstraction relative to physical objects when compared to classical
fiction and tales, but that this difference disappears by the second
half of the century. As Ryan Heuser and Long Le Khac have argued, the
British novel experiences a decline of valuation and a rise of
concretization over the course of the century.[^37] And yet an important
caveat to that finding is that while abstraction appears to be declining
in the novel, it never drops below other kinds of fictional discourse
from the period. Far from the Victorian novel being uniquely concrete,
it is the early-nineteenth-century novel that looks uniquely abstract
when compared to other kinds of fictional discourse from the period. It
suggests that we have been potentially telling this story in reverse:
what matters in the nineteenth century is not the later rise of
concreteness, which looks more like other types of fictional writing,
but the earlier abstractness of the novel, which stands out relative to
other types of fiction (not to mention abstraction remains considerably
more important to these texts overall than their physicality).

The other part of the table, that which concerns the novel's
specificity, tells this same story in the other direction. Where the
first half of the century witnessed little significant difference in the
degree of specificity between the novel and other kinds of fiction
(about a 0.003% difference), by the second half the century, the novel
has about 0.5% more specific words than other kinds of fiction (or about
2 words/page).[^38] In other words, the novel approaches other kinds of
fiction in its degree of abstraction while it departs from other kinds
of fiction in its degree of specificity. It begins the century uniquely
abstract and finishes uniquely specific.

There are of course numerous other ways we might think about the novel's
realism. But these initial results suggest that the Wattian thesis about
the novel's realism, understood here as a greater degree of both
physicality and specificity, appears, in the first instance, less as a
story of exceptionality and more as a regression to the norms of
fictional discourse more generally. In the second instance, where the
novel does become exceptional in its specificity, this occurs much later
than has been traditionally argued. The novel's earlier quantitative
rise in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth century appears to be
marked instead by a higher deegree of conceptual sophistication and
generality, the novel's love of abstraction, far more than its
presentation of the world around it.[^39] As Matthew Erlin has argued,
there is a philosophical dimension to the novel that is an important
part of its history that we have so far overlooked.[^40] The scholarly
emphasis on the realist novel's concretization has missed one of the
primary ways through which novels have historically mattered as a form
of writing, i.e. in their abstractness.

::: {#attachment_725 .image style="max-width: 660px"}
![](http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Piper_fig1.png)

Figure 1. This graph measures the ratio of nouns identified as
"abstract" versus "physical entity" by WordNet classification.
:::

::: {#attachment_726 .image style="max-width: 660px"}
![](http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Piper_fig2.png)

Figure 2. This graph measures the percentage of words in one corpus that
are hypernyms of words in the other corpus. A hypernym is a more
abstract representation than its hyponym. Error bars have been removed
because they are too narrow to visualize.
:::

### **Conclusion** {#conclusion style="text-align: center;"}

In trying to distinguish fiction from non-fiction, in locating what
makes fiction and the novel unique as types of writing, I have in the
process been attempting to gain insights into their larger social
function, to answer that perennial question of "why literature matters."
According to the results presented here, if we focus on the
quantitatively distinct qualities of novels in particular - of what
separates them off from non-fictional or "true" writing - we can say
that the novel's mattering since the nineteenth century appears to be
less a matter of social realism and more one of phenomenological
encounter, a kind of social imbedding in the world. It is not that this
is the only way novels have been or could be meaningful to readers. This
is the problem of predictive versus descriptive approaches that I
discussed at the outset - predictability forecloses other possibilities,
other qualities that may be important. Descriptive models simply
identify which features differ and by how much, without presupposing a
limit to the feature space. The value of the quantitive point of view is
that it allows us to better understand the way a particular type of
writing signals to readers a particular orientation, what we might call
its social positionality (via Bourdieu). This does not foreclose the
myriad ways readers can find their own version of the novel's mattering.
But it does allow us to better understand the novel as a social
category.

Seen in this way, the fictionality of novels is special because of the
notion of encounter and the questioning that comes with it, the way they
put us as readers in the world in a particular way. Things seem and feel
a certain way, just as there is a great deal of doubt and chance and
perhaps and maybe. These findings appear to be robust across two
different languages, two very different time frames, and across both a
larger and smaller, more canonical sample of writing. As we have already
seen, we can use models built on the behavior of the classical
nineteenth-century novel and still predict contemporary novels with a
great deal of accuracy. If we look more closely at these features over
time, we also see how they both increase and then eventually remain
constant over a longer period of time (fig. 1). The values that are put
in place surrounding fictional discourse in the nineteenth century
remain largely intact over the course of time, with some features, like
an emphasis on sense perception rising considerably in importance.[^41]

::: {#attachment_727 .image style="max-width: 660px"}
![](http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Piper_fig3.png)

Figure 3. Rates of "doubt" and sense "perception" in English novels
published between 1800 and 2000. In the former case we see a very slight
rise by the second half of the nineteenth century and in the latter a
continual rise that levels off in the postwar era.
:::

Of course not all novels are like this and not all novels that are like
this are like this in equal ways. The extent to which these markers of
fictionality are consistent across different genres of novelistic
writing still remains an open question. One can also imagine another
study in which we could explore those moments when novels become highly
non-fictional, to understand the truth within the imaginary. How might
we characterize the non-fictional within the fictional and what purpose
do these passages perform? It will come as little surprise that of the
handful of novels misclassified by the algorithm used at the beginning
of this article, Melville's Typee and Omoo are in this group (but not
Moby Dick, suggesting canonization is picking-up at least in part on its
fictionality). But so too is a novel like Behemoth: A Legend of the
Mound-Builders by Cornelius Matthews, a novel about slaying an ancient
Mastodon and argued to be a key influence on Melville.[^42] Can we say
with more specificity what function the informational use of language
has within fiction - Aristotle's legein - not only in these novels, but
within novels more generally? Such a study would try to provide a mirror
image to this article's insights, a diptych in which we see something
about the novel reflected in relief.

Most importantly for me though is the way the methods used here are not
reducible to the single passage or well-turned sentence. There are
hundreds of thousands of lines of novels that contain instances of our
fictional markers, of pronouns, sense perception, and the subjunctive
mood and negation. Each one of them is slightly different from another.
Individually they are nothing special. Taken together, however, they
signal a powerful message to readers. Fictionality is a feeling we get
as readers from the likelihood of seeing all of these words flash across
the page, words like "feeling," "knowing," "seeing," "remembering,"
"almost," "possibly," "vaguely," and a variety of forms of negation, of
the not. This is the space of fiction's apartness. "And where is this
elsewhere?" Roland Barthes once asked. "In the paradise of words."

::: {.printfriendly .pf-alignright}
[](# "Printer Friendly, PDF & Email"){.noslimstat}
:::

[^1]: I would like to gratefully acknowledge the support of the Social
    Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC) in
    funding this research.

[^2]: For a thorough discussion see Käthe Hamburger, The Logic of
    Literature, 2d ed., trans. Marilyn J. Rose (Bloomington: Indiana UP,
    1973), 233 and Gérard Genette, Fiction and Diction, trans. Catherine
    Porter (Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1993), 1-29.

[^3]: There is an important distinction to be made between fiction and
    truth here. This essay is about detecting the qualities that inhere
    when texts signal to readers their imaginariness or their truth.
    This is different from detecting whether a text is true or not-true
    as in the sense of "lie-detection."

[^4]: While initial, very successful work has been done on the
    predictability of fiction, here I want to study the particular
    features that are indicative of fictional writing and what those
    features have to tell us about the nature of fictionality and the
    history of the novel in particular. See Ted Underwood,
    "Understanding Genre in a Collection of a Million Volumes, Interim
    Report." Figshare.
    https://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1281251.v1. Retrieved: 16 27,
    Feb 20, 2016 (GMT).

[^5]: Richard M. Gale, "The Fictive Use of Language," Philosophy 66
    (1971): 324-340; David Lewis, "Truth in Fiction," American
    Philosophical Quarterly 15 (1978): 37-46; John R. Searle, "The
    Logical Status of Fictional Discourse," Expression and Meaning:
    Studies in the Theory of Speech Acts (Cambridge: Cambridge UP,
    1979), 58-76; Hilary Putnam, "Is there a Fact of Matter about
    Fiction?" Poetics Today 4.1 (1983): 77-82; Benjamin Hrushovski,
    "Fictionality and Fields of Reference," Poetics Today 5.2 (1984):
    227-251; Gregory Currie, The Nature of Fiction (Cambridge: Cambridge
    UP, 1990).

[^6]: John R. Searle, "The Logical Status of Fictional Discourse," 68.
    Everything depends on Searlie's distinction there on "stretch of
    discourse," itself a stretch of discourse.

[^7]: Maurice Blanchot, The Instant of My Death and Jaques Derrida,
    Demeure: Fiction and Testimony (Stanford: Stanford UP, 2000), 28.

[^8]: Stanley Fish, Is there a text in this class? The Authority of
    Interpretive Communities (Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1982).

[^9]: Hardly a thing of the past, this position is now being replayed in
    the field of "postclassical" narratology, which argues that there
    are no inherent distinguishing features between fictional and
    non-fictional narratives. Driven largely by new work in the theory
    of mind, attention is paid not to the unique features of texts but
    the cognitive apparatus that is brought to bear on these texts and
    that is assumed to be common across all kinds of narration. As I
    will show, not only are fictional narratives highly distinct from
    non-fictional ones, but their differences are most strongly driven
    by an attention to sense perception, that is, to a sense of
    embodiment, making a strict reliance on cognition as narrative's
    primary framework problematic. For the postclassical narratological
    position, see J. Alber and M. Fludernik, eds., Postclassical
    Narratology (Columbus: Ohio State UP, 2010). This new work is driven
    largely as a response to the "classical" narratological work of
    Dorrit Cohn, The Distinction of Fiction (Baltimore: JHU Press, 1999)
    and even earlier Käthe Hamburger, The Logic of Literature
    (Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1973).

[^10]: Perhaps it is worth elaborating on this point. The philosophers
    of language were invested in the idea that for any given utterance,
    there were no defining features that would indicate whether
    something was true or not in every instance. To use an example from
    our passages above, the sentence, "A woman standing there recognized
    her, and they began to talk," does not tell us in any clear way
    whether it is true or not true, whether it refers to something that
    actually happened in the world versus something that was imagined.
    However, when taken in aggregate, language does begin to communicate
    its intended referentiality. This is one of those cases, as Stanley
    Cavell liked to point out, where the philosopher's example is always
    too simple to be able to explain something in the real world.

[^11]: An open question remains the degree of variability of
    "fictionality" or the See the work of Ted Underwood that addresses
    precisely this idea of the stability of genre and Mark Algee-Hewitt
    et al. which addresses the pre-nineteenth-century heterogeneity of
    fictional narrative. Ted Underwood, "The Life Cycles of Genres," CA:
    Journal of Cultural Analytics May 23, 2016:
    http://culturalanalytics.org/2016/05/the-life-cycles-of-genres/; and
    Mark Algee‐Hewitt, Laura Eidem, Ryan Heuser, Anita Law, and Tanya
    Llewellyn, "Novel Taxonomies: Prehistories of Genre in the
    Eighteenth Century, CA (forthcoming). In a non-computational vein,
    Thomas Pavel argues that the unity of the nineteenth- and
    twentieth-century novel is an intentional aesthetic contrast to the
    early modern prioritization of "sub-genres.\" "Early modern
    narrative culture emphasized the differences between subgenres,
    while later forms of the novel are the result of multiple attempts
    to blend these subgenres together." Thomas Pavel, The Lives of the
    Novel: A History (Princeton: Princeton UP, 2015), 10.

[^12]: This argument picks-up on Dorrit Cohn's earlier,
    pre-computational belief that "fiction is recognizable as fiction
    only if and when it actualizes its focalizing potential." Dorrit
    Cohn, The Distinction of Fiction, 25.

[^13]: In this, I see my findings aligning closely with the "possible
    worlds theory" that was influential in narrative theory in the
    1990s. See Thomas Pavel, Fictional Worlds (Cambridge: Harvard UP,
    1989); Marie Laure-Ryan, Possible Worlds, Artificial Intelligence,
    and Narrative Theory (Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1992); and Ruth
    Ronen, Possible Worlds in Literary Theory (Cambridge: Cambridge UP,
    1994). It also lends support for the more recent new historical work
    of John Bender that emphasizes the relationship between the coeval
    rise of the novel in the eighteenth century and scientific
    experimentation. See John Bender, Ends of Enlightenment (Stanford:
    Stanford UP, 2012).

[^14]: As Catherine Gallagher writes, "If a genre can be thought of as
    having an attitude, the novel has seemed ambivalent toward its
    fictionality - at once inventing it as an ontological ground and
    placing severe constraints upon it." See Catherine Gallagher, "The
    Rise of Fictionality," The Novel, vol. 1, ed. Franco Moretti
    (Princeton: Princeton UP, 2006), 336-363; Elaine Freedgood,
    "Denotatively, Technically, Literally," Representations 125 (Winter,
    2014): 1-14; Frances Ferguson, "Now It's Personal: D.A. Miller and
    Too-Close-Reading," Critical Inquiry 41 (Spring 2015), 527; and Ian
    Watt, The Rise of the Novel: Studies in Defoe, Richardson, and
    Fielding (Berkeley: California UP, 2001). It should be added that
    Freedgood's emphasis is by no means normative in her identification
    of the importance of the novel's technical vocabulary; she simply
    wants us to attend to this overseen dimension because of the way it
    expands the archive of reading. As I will show at the close of this
    chapter, this attention to factuality within the novel is something
    that computational approaches are well suited to address. It is also
    worth noting how these positions all focus on an earlier time-frame
    than I am exploring here, and yet their time-frames still serve as
    the basis of normative arguments about the novel more generally
    ("our kind of fiction" in Michael McKeon's words). An open question
    is whether these ambiguities of fictionality or sense of heightened
    referentiality look that way because of what is happening in the
    seventeenth-century novel, that is, whether these arguments are
    based on a different kind of shift occurring around the turn of the
    eighteenth century that is no longer operative by the nineteenth.

[^15]: For a fuller discussion and use of predictive models, see Ted
    Underwood, "The Life Cycles of Genre."

[^16]: Data and code for this project is located here: Piper, Andrew,
    2016, "Fictionality",
    [doi:10.7910/DVN/5WKTZV](http://dx.doi.org/10.7910/DVN/5WKTZV),
    Harvard Dataverse, V1

[^17]: The designations of fiction and non-fiction are derived from Ted
    Underwood's collection, which is located here:
    https://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1281251.v1. All duplicate
    titles were removed, all documents with the word stems for "essays,"
    "tales," "scenes" or "stories" in either the genre or title fields
    were removed, and only those works with an 89% or better chance of
    containing more than 80% pages of fiction were chosen.

[^18]: Similar to the .txtLAB nineteenth-century collection, the
    documents here represent a canonical representation of fiction and
    non-fiction of the past ten years, meaning they have passed through
    some kind of filter, whether it is the New York Times Book Review, a
    literary prize competition short list, or appeared on various
    bestseller lists of platforms like Amazon.com or the New York Times.
    For a more thorough review of the data set and its insights into
    contemporary forms of social value surrounding the novel, see Andrew
    Piper and Eva Portelance, "How Cultural Capital Works: Prizewinning
    Novels, Bestsellers, and the Time of Reading," Post-45 05.10.2016:
    http://post45.research.yale.edu/2016/05/how-cultural-capital-works-prizewinning-novels-bestsellers-and-the-time-of-reading/.

[^19]: For those interested in studying the dictionaries used by LIWC,
    see their language manual:
    http://www.liwc.net/LIWC2007LanguageManual.pdf.

[^20]: See Yla R. Tausczik and James W. Pennebaker, "LIWC and
    Computerized Text Analysis Methods," Journal of Language and Social
    Psychology 29.1 (2010): 24-54.

[^21]: For a thoughtful and practical review of lexicon-driven research,
    see H. A. Schwartz, J. C. Eichstaedt, L. Dziurzynski, M. L. Kern, E.
    Blanco, S. Ramones, M. E. P Seligman, and L. H. Ungar, "Choosing the
    Right Words: Characterizing and Reducing Error of the Word Count
    Approach." In Proceedings of SEM-2013: Second Joint Conference on
    Lexical and Computational Semantics, Atlanta, Georgia, USA (2013):
    296-305. For a comparison of lexicon versus machine-learning
    approaches to text analysis, see Andrew Piper and Eva Portelance,
    "How Cultural Capital Works."

[^22]: On modeling and computational hermeneutics, see Andrew Piper,
    "Novel Devotions: Conversional Reading, Computational Modeling and
    the Modern Novel," New Literary History 46.1 (2015): 63-98.

[^23]: All dictionaries and modifications are included in the dataset
    released with this article:

[^24]: The kernlab package was used in R. All runs use a Gaussian kernel
    ("rbfdot"). A useful introductory text to machine learning is Brett
    Lantz, Machine Learning with R (Birmingham, UK: Packt, 2013).

[^25]: It is entirely possible to reverse this assumption and privilege
    features that are more prevalent overall, something that becomes
    valuable when assessing individual words. This is the approach I use
    in Table 11 for example. Individual words can have such low
    frequencies that favoring words with higher counts assures that one
    is finding more "important" or perhaps "relevant" vocabulary, i.e.
    less random vocabulary. The crucial point is that the outcomes are
    determined by the initial assumptions used in the model.

[^26]: See LIWC\_Comparison\_EN\_FIC\_v\_HATHI\_FIC.csv.

[^27]: In addition to removing dialogue, 200 verbs of communication were
    removed from the texts and any personal pronouns that appeared
    within +/- 1 word (I said, said she, etc.).

[^28]: Using the NLP package in R, the mean number of named persons in a
    novel was 10.58 where it was 23.94 for history. See NER\_19C\_EN.csv
    and NER\_19C\_History.csv. See Script 3.1.

[^29]: Lisa Zunshine, Why We Read Fiction: Theory of Mind and the Novel
    (Columbus: Ohio State UP, 2006).

[^30]: Ted Underwood, "The Life Cycles of Genres,"
    http://culturalanalytics.org/2016/05/the-life-cycles-of-genres/.

[^31]: This fiction/novel distinction that is translated across the axis
    of time will recapitulate itself in the genre distinctions of the
    contemporary novel as they relate to social value. One of the
    strongest ways bestselling and prizewinning novels in the present
    differentiate is across the feature of nostalgia and retrospection.
    See Piper and Portelance, "How Cultural Capital Works."

[^32]: Results are contained in the table
    MDW\_EN\_NOV\_3P\_v\_HATHI\_TALES\_Final.csv. See Script 4.1.

[^33]: This observation aligns with Matt Erlin's argument about the
    philosophical dimensions of novelistic narration. Matthew Erlin,
    "From the Philosophical to the Epistemic Novel?" CA: Journal of
    Cultural Analytics (forthcoming).

[^34]: If we just condition on these four features, the classification
    results will outperform the average accuracy of four features chosen
    at random by a statistically significant margin, though to be sure
    the numbers are considerably lower than when we use all 80 features,
    and there are other combinations that will perform slightly better.
    Those feature combinations that do perform better most often contain
    present tense verbs and categories of sense perception, pointing to
    the other ways discussed here through which novels are unique. All
    Features = 76%, Prevarication Freatures = 63.4%, Random4 (100
    trials) = 60.8% +- 3.8%.

[^35]: The novels are first reduced to only their nouns using openNLP in
    R and then the transcription is run using the python script
    hypernyms\_ReturnTopClass.py.

[^36]: The data for this table can be found here:
    Abstraction\_Ratio\_English750\_1800\_1849\_NounsOnly.csv,
    Abstraction\_Ratio\_English750\_1850\_1899\_NounsOnly.csv,
    Abstraction\_Ratio\_Hathi\_Tales\_NounsOnly.csv,
    Hypernymy\_English\_Tales\_v\_750\_1\_TakeAll.csv,
    Hypernymy\_English\_Tales\_v\_750\_2\_TakeAll.csv,
    Hypernymy\_English750\_1\_v\_Tales\_TakeAll.csv,
    Hypernymy\_English750\_2\_v\_Tales\_TakeAll.csv. See Script 5.1 and
    5.2 for a fuller explanation of how the scores were calculated.

[^37]: Ryan Heuser and Long Le Khac, "A Quantitative Literary History of
    2,958 Nineteenth-Century British Novels: The Semantic Cohort
    Method," Stanford Literary Lab Pamphlet 4:
    http://litlab.stanford.edu/LiteraryLabPamphlet4.pdf.

[^38]: One of the reasons for the extremely low p-value here is the high
    number of observations. Given that we are comparing every novel to
    every other novel across groups, we get over 13,000 observations.
    Even small differences can look significant. The important point is
    the actual difference in this case which changes from 0.003% to
    0.5%.

[^39]: This understanding of the novel's asbtractness as key to its
    earlier distinctiveness offers a different way of thinking about a
    critique of the realist hypothesis than, say, Wayne C. Booth. For
    Booth, the novel's significance, or for him the "good" novel's
    significance, is its ability to focus on dramatic intensity rather
    than realism. "The interest in realism is not a 'theory' or even a
    combination of theories that can be proved right or wrong; it is an
    expression of what men \[sic\] at a given time have cared for most."
    This brings us closer to a theory of plot as arc in the spirit of
    Matthew Jockers' work, the rhythmic rise and fall of emotional
    intensities. See Wayne C. Booth, The Rhetoric of Fiction (Chicago
    UP, 1983), 63.

[^40]: Matthew Erlin, "From the Philosophical to the Epistemic Novel?"
    CA: Journal of Cultural Analytics (forthcoming).

[^41]: Further analysis suggests that this increase is largely driven by
    a reliance on words for "site." Most of the other senses remain
    flat. More research could uncover what this ocular bias suggests in
    terms of fiction.

[^42]: Curtis Dahl, "Moby Dick's Cousin Behemoth," American Literature
    31.1 (1959), 21-29.
