---
author: Matthew Wilkens
date: '11.01.16'
shortauthor: Matthew Wilkens
shorttitle: 'Genre, Computation, and the Varieties of Twentieth-Century U.S. Fiction'
title: 'Genre, Computation, and the Varieties of Twentieth-Century U.S. Fiction'
---

###### *Peer-Reviewed By: Scott Selisker*

###### *Clusters: [Genre](http://culturalanalytics.org/2016/05/genre/)*

###### *Journal ISSN: 2371-4549* *DOIs: [10.22148/16.009](https://doi.org/10.22148/16.009) (CA) and [10.7910/DVN/EXPXYT](http://dx.doi.org/10.7910/DVN/EXPXYT)(Dataverse)*

 

Is "literary fiction" a useful genre label in the post-World War II
United States? In some sense, the answer is obviously yes; there are
sections marked "literary fiction" on Amazon, in bookstores, and on
Goodreads, all of which contain many postwar and contemporary titles.
Much of what is taught in contemporary fiction classes also falls under
the heading of literary fiction, even if that label isn't always used
explicitly. On the other hand, literary fiction, if it hangs together at
all, may be defined as much by its (or its consumers') resistance to
genre as by its positive textual content. That is, where conventional
genres like the detective story or the erotic romance are recognizable
by the presence of certain character types, plot events, and narrative
styles, it is difficult to find any broadly agreeable set of such
features by which literary fiction might be consistently identified.

Literary fiction, then, might be understood as an anti-genre genre.
Perhaps. But my own suspicion is that literary fiction functions in
genre terms calibrated to the tastes of an upper-middlebrow literary
market that values the relative invisibility of genre and is resistant
to reading in generic terms. Indeed, as Mark McGurl and Caren Irr have
separately shown in recent books, it is possible to discern a handful of
subclasses within the broad category of "serious" postwar literature and
to find links between genre and non-genre writing, though the broad
coherence of literary fiction itself remains in some doubt.

If my hunch about the high-level contours of literary fiction in the
twentieth century is correct, it should be possible to identify one or
more groups of contemporary literary fiction that hang together at least
as closely as do the texts that are more conventionally called genre
fiction. While the specific features marking out these literary genres
will be unique - just as war novels differ in form and content from
vampire tales - their functional codification will not. Identifying such
a genre or genres would allow literary scholars to understand the
dynamics of the contemporary novel in part through keywords similar to
those used to treat mass-market genres (including "community,"
"formula," and "identification"). A generic understanding of literary
fiction would also provide further motivation for the ongoing revision
of the literary canon by pointing to the implicit standardization of
much literary fiction in contrast to the formal and topical diversity
that scholars generally seek.

Genre is, however, a difficult concept to pin down, one that has been
treated unevenly and for a range of ends in literary criticism,
sociology, and the cultural marketplace. For critics in the mold of
Northrop Frye, genre is a formal category having to do with the "radical
of presentation" through which plot-level events are portrayed; for
Gérard Genette, it involves primarily content-level differences within
formally defined modes; for Raymond Williams, genre is part of a "social
language" that unites distinct aspects of the social and material
processes that make up a cultural situation.[^1] For Amazon and Netflix,
genres cohere around a mixture of thematic content, style of
presentation, and communities of consumption, which explains why
"religious" and "gay and lesbian" are two of the largest Amazon fiction
genres and why both "international films" and "witty TV comedies
featuring a strong female lead" are Netflix genres.

Within literary fiction proper, McGurl's recent work on the influence of
creative writing programs  has helped to distinguish the related
subgenres of "technomodernism," "high-cultural pluralism," and
"middle-class minimalism," each of which shades not only into the other
two, but also into the larger, longer-standing genres of science
fiction, detective fiction, and life writing.[^2] McGurl's generic
anatomy is valuable, and we will see evidence of the genealogies he
identifies in the results below, especially those linking tendencies
within conventionally identified postwar literary fiction to
extraliterary and pulp genres.  Irr's work on the varieties of what she
calls the "geopolitical" novel presents a detailed analysis of
internationalism in twenty-first century U.S. fiction along lines that
might be understood as similarly generic, if necessarily more
specialized than any theorization genre systems as such.[^3] Both McGurl
and Irr highlight the inseparability of social and textual factors in
their treatments of genre, a fact that serves to highlight the
increasing salience of cultural information to genre construction as
publishing and readership alike have opened to more diverse
participation over the course of the twentieth century.

Even if critics agreed on one of these definitions, however, there would
remain the task of identifying and categorizing the features through
which it is manifested in specific texts. That is, how exactly does a
reader become aware that she's reading a detective story or a neoliberal
allegory? To what can she point in the text or in her situation of
consumption that signals generic membership?

The research presented here is designed to answer three linked questions
about genre and literary fiction in the twentieth-century U.S. First,
what is a reasonable set of features through which to distinguish texts
belonging to different genres? Second, are there major genres or
genre-like groupings that have not been previously identified within the
most widely collected and circulated novels of the period? That is, can
we build a model of genre in twentieth-century fiction without knowing
in advance all the genres we expect to find and without having read most
of the books in question, and if so, does such a model suggest novel
literary affinities? Third, to what extent does the subset of literary
fiction that is the subject of much academic and intellectual interest
cohere in generic terms? If it does cohere strongly, what can we make of
the observed pattern of inclusion and exclusion?

To answer these questions requires three things in turn: a (very) rough
theory of genre, a corpus of relevant texts, and one or more strategies
for translating that theory of genre into specific judgments about group
membership for the corpus texts. The working theory is rough indeed: I
call a genre a set of texts that resemble one another in subject matter,
style of presentation, setting, and, to a modest extent, circumstances
of production such as publication date and author identity. Details
follow below, but the idea is that genre is constituted by a range of
family resemblances, most (but not all) of which are textual and all of
which are susceptible to identification, if only by proxy, and to
imperfect quantification. What this definition loses in theoretical
sophistication, it gains in its range of potential application; it is a
framework intended to cover many colloquial uses of the term "genre" in
relation to the novel and to be extensible in future work to other
mass-cultural aesthetic forms including film, television, music, and the
like.

A full account of the corpus and the methods used to analyze it follow
immediately below, but first, a brief summary of the findings.
Computational analyses using unsupervised machine learning techniques on
more than 8,500 American novels published during the long twentieth
century suggest that the working theory of genre offered here can be
made functional and interpretable in a range of cases. The results
indicate an increasing fluidity of genre in the post-World War II
period, when it becomes more difficult to tease apart many novels
outside certain highly codified forms (especially detective fiction and
war stories). In the absence of extra-textual information, we find an
intriguing continuity between early-century regionalist writing and
postwar science fiction. The addition of even a very modest amount of
historical and social data weakens this association, but suggests that
canonical and near-canonical contemporary fiction by male writers
including Kurt Vonnegut, Saul Bellow, Walker Percy, Richard Yates, Don
DeLillo, Tim O'Brien, Stephen King, Philip K. Dick, John Updike, and
James Michener both shares a high degree of text-level similarity and is
strongly atypical of postwar fiction overall, a result that argues for
the continuing value of revisions to the literary-academic canon. Gender
also appears to be a good predictor of at least some additional generic
divides, especially within what we would ordinarily call commercial
genre fiction after 1945.

### **Corpus and methods** {#corpus-and-methods style="text-align: center;"}

The corpus to be analyzed is sampled from a list of the most frequently
held novels and novel-like texts by American authors published between
1880 and 1990 as cataloged by WorldCat. The research set comprises 8,580
volumes totaling nearly one billion words, distributed bimodally with
peak holdings around 1900 and the 1980s. Note that the corpus does not
contain novels published after 1990 and is therefore not well suited to
addressing questions of genre in very contemporary U.S. fiction.

::: {#attachment_562 .image style="max-width: 660px"}
![](http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/fig1-e1476317846322.png)

Figure 1. Distribution of volumes in the research corpus by date of
publication and author gender.
:::

Bibliographic information about the texts, including author genders and
ethnicities and dates of original publication, was collected by hand.
Slightly less than a third of the texts are by women; only a tiny subset
(about 3%) of those for which the author's ethnicity is known are by
non-white writers. The range of sources of these imbalances - which
include everything from direct discrimination in the publishing industry
and in library acquisitions, to inequalities of economic and educational
opportunity for authors, to the changing demographics of readership -
are currently under active investigation. Nevertheless, the corpus is
representative of twentieth-century American fiction as codified by the
current and past practices of many academic and cultural institutions.
It is obviously not identical to the set of all U.S. novels published in
the twentieth century, but it is much less canonical than the selection
principle might lead one to expect. It contains, after all, nearly 9,000
novels. Most of them are obscure.

Some additional observations on the composition of the corpus may help
readers to better understand its coverage. The single most-held book is
Toni Morrison's *Beloved*. Somewhat counterintuitively, books by
minority writers seem to be held either very widely or not at all; the
small percentage of included volumes by non-white authors is
disproportionately concentrated in the top 20% of books ranked by
library holdings.[^4] Also prominent are late works by canonical authors
(Faulkner's *The Reivers* and Hemingway's *Islands in the Stream*, for
instance); historical fiction in the vein of Jean M. Auel - who wrote
*Clan of the Cave Bear* and a series of similar novels - and James A.
Michener; and middlebrow titles by the likes of Anne Tyler, John Irving,
and Pat Conroy. But most of the books in the corpus are unknown to me
and to the literary scholars with whom I have consulted.[^5] Note that,
because library holding data are not used in the computational model,
none of these works is weighted in any special way beyond the fact of
its inclusion in the corpus.

As explained at the outset, we are treating genre as a matter of
similarity between texts, rather than as a question of conformity to any
existing set of paradigmatic examples. The open-ended nature of this
task is what dictates an unsupervised computational learning method.
Briefly, unsupervised classification methods differ from supervised
methods in that they do not assume any "correct" classification output,
hence they do not rely on training data to select and weight feature
inputs. The latter approaches - *supervised* (as opposed to
*unsupervised*) methods - can be attractive to the extent that their
performance is directly measurable over a set of gold-standard
classifications, typically produced, in literary cases, by experts in
the field. When the performance of a supervised method is low, users can
tune parameters and inputs and observe any resulting improvement in
classification accuracy. The right-wrong nature of supervised output is
also an important check on what we might call interpretive overfitting,
that is, the human ability to tell a just-so story about the results of
almost any classification task.[^6] But users do need to be able to
supply training data that looks, for the most part, like the corpus as a
whole and includes the range of desired, known categories. The task, in
that case, is to find the right features and techniques to reproduce the
judgments embedded in the training data.

In the present instance, however, the premise is specifically that we do
not know what the range of correct classifications in the full corpus
might be. Here, then, we define our task as identifying aggregate
volume-level similarity across a range of features that capture
significant aspects of genre as defined above and as used in many
(though, of course, not all) critical treatments of the term. The
features in question fall under a small set of headings:

1.  Subject matter, measured in the present case by topic-modeled word
    frequencies.
2.  Style, form, and diction, measured by volume-level statistics
    including reading-level score, verb fraction, text length, etc.
3.  Setting and location, assessed via geolocation extraction and
    geosimilarity measures.
4.  A limited range of extra-textual features, including publication
    date and author gender. Extra-textual features are excluded from
    some of the models below in order to compare text-only results to
    more expansive conceptions of generic affinity.

This is a small set, but many major components of actually existing
critical discourse about genre can be identified under one of its broad
headings. That said, the goal is to select a set of potentially useful
features to use as algorithmic inputs; evaluation will depend on the
extent to which those features help to reproduce textual groupings that
resemble critical judgments about generic membership. If the output is
good, it won't matter a great deal, for present purposes, that one might
prefer a slightly different set. If the output is bad, it won't matter
how abstractly well-justified any of the features might be. What
follows, then, is less a detailed argument for the specific areas and
features deployed than it is a summary of the choices involved.

Subject matter is straightforwardly the most important of the set.
Detective fiction is about detectives and murders and the police.
Romance, in the modern sense, is about desire and bodies and love.
Historical novels involve objects and situations adapted (if not notably
accurately) to a specific time and place.  This is the main way readers
know that they have encountered one of these genres, and thematic
considerations retain, as we have seen, a certain pride of place in
generic systems from the theoretical to the commercial.

To quantify content and subject matter, I have used latent Dirichlet
allocation topic modeling.[^7] The approach is to build a 200-topic
model of the corpus via MALLET, which model is then reduced to 20
principal components, each consisting of a different relative weight
attached to all 200 modeled topics.[^8] This dimensionality reduction
ensures that over-split and highly correlated topics are treated
together as content features and produces, for the most part, relatively
interpretable components for the model. Twenty of the 29 total modeled
features used in the full model - 69% - are thus devoted to specific
content rather than to form, geography, or bibliographic data.

Despite the prominence of subject matter, stylistic and formal features
also matter. This is true in part due to the final inseparability of
form from content; thematic questions are always also formal questions.
We know this already on theoretical grounds and it is easy to see
directly in the case of the noir, for example, where the short,
declarative sentence is a near requisite to generic membership. The
issue may be even more pressing with respect to identifiably "literary"
fiction, which is picked out, on the anti-generic reading, less by its
content than by the register of its diction and style of its narration.
In fact, the results below suggest precisely that certain types of
post-1945 literary fiction are distinguished by a combination of modern
content with typically prewar stylistic features. The genre of the
encyclopedic novel, moreover, is perhaps more about length than Edward
Mendelson or I would care to admit.[^9] Erotica and romance are
distinguished only in part by the explicitness of their content; the way
in which their stories are told matters, too.

The stylistic features deployed here are four: text length as measured
by word count; grade-level reading score, which combines average
sentence length with average syllable count per word; the fraction of
the word count made up of terms that entered the English language before
1150, as described by Underwood and Sellers, which provides a proxy
measure for the "elevation" of the text's diction (higher fractions of
early terms correspond to lower, less Latinate diction); and the
fraction of all words in the text that are verbs, a measure of narrative
balance between action and description.[^10]

Setting and location are relevant to genre in two ways. First, there is
the longstanding consideration of public and domestic space associated
with differently gendered narratives. And a love story set in the
wilderness but deploying the conventions of the manor is a comedy as
much as a romance. Second, there is the matter of national and
geographic divisions that don't necessarily track either author identity
or textual content alone, as between, say, the Holmesian and hard-boiled
detective story, or between historical fiction of the Second World War
and the distinct genre of counter-factual history (the latter containing
a mashup of modern and mid-century geographies). The transposition of an
established generic form to a different geographic context may also
represent part of the difference between, say, the realisms of Thomas
Hardy, Charles Dickens, and Sarah Orne Jewett. Spatial issues are
perhaps not the primary determinants of genre, but they have a bearing
that is not always well captured by thematic and formal features.

Three input features are thus devoted to geography. These are assembled
from extracted geolocation data produced via named entity recognition
and automated geocoding (with limited hand correction) as described in
Wilkens.[^11] The data - which ranges from continents and oceans to
nations, cities, parks, and individual buildings - is then aggregated by
nation and by U.S. state.[^12] The distribution of the resulting
aggregates across the corpus texts are consolidated into a TF-IDF
matrix, which is then reduced from 268 dimensions (corresponding to the
268 unique nations and U.S. states in the data) to 3 principal
components, which are used as features in the models. I note in passing
that these components can be succinctly, if quite loosely, summarized as
"New York," "California and not Europe," and "Europe and not the
American South or Midwest."

Extra-textual features are perhaps the most fraught inclusion in any
evaluation of genre. If we understand genre labels as attached to groups
of texts that resemble one another, we might insist that such
resemblance be measured according to textual features alone. But to do
so would seem to ignore a large part of both critical and readerly
practice. We speak of women's writing and African-American literature in
ways that, while not identical to genre, are not altogether distinct,
and we would often insist that knowledge concerning authorial identity
is at least as relevant as the more obviously generic fictional or
nonfictional status of a text. The publication date of a book also
matters so long as we retain historicist aspirations for our
scholarship. As Borges taught us, Pierre Menard wrote a much different
work than did Cervantes; *Werther*, written today, is related to the
memoir boom in a way that Goethe's original is not. These two
extra-textual features - date of publication and author gender - are
used as inputs to the full model, but are excluded in certain cases
indicated below to allow a comparison between that model and one trained
on textual features alone.

There are thus 29 (or 27, in the text-only case) specific features
included in the analyses below, with the number of feature types in each
of the four classes corresponding to the relative weight of that class
in the model. The features and class weights are summarized in table 1.

  Class             Details                                         \#   Weight (full)   Weight (text-only)
  ----------------- ----------------------------------------------- ---- --------------- --------------------
  Content           Principal components of 200-topic model         20   0,69            0,74
  Form              Length, reading level, diction, verb fraction   4    0,14            0,15
  Geography         Principal components of geographic TF-IDF       3    0,10            0,11
  Extra-textual\*   Publication date, author gender                 2    0,07            --

Table 1. Summary of features used for unsupervised learning. (\*
indicates features excluded from the text-only model.)

There is room for productive disagreement concerning both the identity
and the details of these features, the determination of which represents
a series of interpretive and practical choices guided by the preceding
elaboration of genre. Additional textual and extra-textual data could
certainly be valuable. Commercial information including sales price,
copies sold, and the market orientation of the issuing press or imprint
- all adjusted for changes over more than a century of cultural history
- might help to track generic filiations, as could details about cover
imagery and reader reception networks, though the incorporation of large
amounts of such data could serve to reproduce too strongly the existing
genre categories that we seek to interrogate and would certainly pose
serious collection difficulties. Alternate approaches to assessing
content and formal similarity might be developed. Greater representation
of racial and ethnic diversity in the underlying corpus would allow
important additional questions to be addressed. Nevertheless, the
attempt has been in every case to construct features that, while
feasible to collect and tractable to compute, are maximally tied to the
social and formal issues presented by the problem of genre. But support
for their appropriateness will come ultimately in the form of the
classification outputs built on top of them.

Some of these features are correlated, though the dimensionality
reduction performed on the content- and geographic-type data minimizes
correlations within those sets. Figure 2 shows feature correlations
(Pearson product-moment coefficients) in the full data set. Notable
correlations (positive and negative) exist between publication date and
the first few topic components; between diction score and the third
topic component; and between diction score and reading level. None of
these correlations is unexpected. Further analysis of the interactions
between features follows in the discussion of the models, below.

::: {#attachment_564 .image style="max-width: 660px"}
![](http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/fig2.png)

Figure 2. Correlations among input variables.
:::

The features are normalized to mean zero and variance 1, then reduced to
ten dimensions via PCA to produce suitable density given the corpus
size. Finally, I perform two types of clustering over the feature
matrix. The first is classic *k*-means, which takes as an input the
desired number of output clusters and returns an assignment to one of
those clusters for each of the input texts. The assignment is determined
by finding the set of cluster centers that minimizes the average
distance between those centers and the data points closest to each of
them. *K*-means is an older statistical technique, pioneered in the
1950s and '60s, but it is easy to perform and to interpret, and is a
suitable choice when the number of clusters is known in advance (or can
be derived from heuristic analysis of the results).

The second clustering technique, DBSCAN, is more recent and works on a
different principle. It identifies regions of high relative density
among points in the feature space, assigning the points that fall within
any such region to a cluster.[^13] DBSCAN is thus robust to noise
(outlying points are assigned to no cluster at all) and, within reason,
to low-density feature spaces (in which it will detect only the few
high-density regions), a fact that will be important in the analysis of
generic patterns in post-1945 fiction.

### **Feature and model validation** {#feature-and-model-validation style="text-align: center;"}

As always with unsupervised learning, the question "is it working?" has
to be answered with interpretive interventions. To test the validity of
the procedure, I generated a 50-cluster model including extra-textual
data over the full corpus via *k*-means and examined the resulting
assignments for a test set of 302 novels by 25 authors.[^14] The number
of included books per author in the test set varied from as few as two
(Jack London) to as many as 37 (William Dean Howells); the median was 10
volumes per author. These books and writers are ones for which
reasonably canonical genre assignments seemed possible, as indicated in
figure 3, but even here, there is room for meaningful disagreement about
the details. Authors were selected for inclusion in the test set in part
on the basis of the relative generic consistency of their texts so as to
minimize instances in which texts by a single author are expected to
assort to different clusters.

What we are looking for in the algorithmic assignments isn't necessarily
the precise arrangement depicted in figure 3 (which, after all,
conflates texts and authors in a way that implies a false sense of
perfect generic consistency within any author's oeuvre), but a plausible
alignment of similar authors and texts with one another both within and
across clusters. That is to say, most authors should have most of their
works assigned to a small number of clusters, and most clusters should
contain works by generically similar authors.

::: {#attachment_567 .image style="max-width: 660px"}
![](http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/fig3.png)

Figure 3. Expected generic groups in a test set of 302 novels by 25
authors.
:::

The output across 50 clusters is difficult to present concisely, because
it is necessarily more diverse than the limit case of figure 3.
Seventeen of the 25 authors (68%) have at least half of their works
assigned to (different) single clusters from among the 50 clusters
available, a good result given the decision to split clusters
aggressively by selecting a large *k*. The authors whose works are more
diversely categorized are, for the most part, "literary" writers not
usually identified as having worked in a single genre, including John
Updike (on whom, more below), Joyce Carol Oates, John Steinbeck, William
Dean Howells, and Willa Cather. This result lends some support to the
anti-generic view of literary fiction, though the density-based results
below complicate such a conclusion. Surprisingly, Philip K. Dick and
Patricia Highsmith - both more solidly genre authors - likewise see
their work spread across several clusters, a result illuminated by the
text-only DBSCAN findings below.

Also relevant is the range of authors included within each cluster and,
more specifically, the number of clusters that produce surprising (hence
potentially incorrect or newly informative) groupings. Of the 14
clusters that contain multiple texts by each of two or more test-set
authors (that is, clusters that are more mixed in their authorial
membership), most are as expected: Howells with Edith Wharton and Henry
James; Isaac Asimov with Robert A. Heinlein and Dick; Zane Grey with
Louis L'Amour; Don DeLillo with Philip Roth, Richard Yates, and Updike.
But two are unexpected, including the genre writers Mary Higgins Clark
and Highsmith grouped with Oates and Yates; and Elmore Leonard and Dick
with John Steinbeck.

It's hard to say, in the absence of a full critical treatment of the
books in question, whether these are outright errors or previously
unremarked lines of filiation between some of the twentieth century's
most widely read authors. In the first case, the
Clark-Highsmith-Oates-Yates group, the model appears to be picking up
features in the selected texts related to comparatively lowbrow postwar
fiction set in eastern U.S. locations: middling reading-level scores,
lack of elevated diction, a relatively high frequency of verbs, a
general preference for contemporary topical content, and a preponderance
of eastern U.S. settings at the expense of both Europe and the western
U.S. This combination of features is not unique in the test set, but a
handful of texts by these four writers match one another quite closely.
The Leonard-Dick-Steinbeck cluster is less certain, though they share
some topical content and, more prominently, both a preference for
western settings and fairly simple sentence structures.

These two surprising clusters from among the fifty generated do little
to undermine confidence in the validity of the model. They may in fact
increase it, since some degree of lack of fit between computational
models and existing categories is surely to be expected and can be
explained in concrete terms. The same process performed on text-only
data produces broadly similar outputs. On the whole, the *k*-means
results suggest that the selected feature sets are capable of producing
generic clusters that broadly resemble existing critical judgments, an
important step toward validating the approach and the choices that
enable it.

### **Unnatural kinds** {#unnatural-kinds style="text-align: center;"}

There's no such thing as a natural kind, of course, and the
methodological details above should make clear that there are multiple,
active critical interventions involved in both the setup and analysis of
unsupervised learning techniques. But the *k*-means model isn't ideally
suited to identifying an unknown number of rare, high-density clusters
embedded within large collections.[^15] Yet such clusters may be exactly
the ones that literary critics seeking to understand genre in the
twentieth century would most like to locate, since they are the
potential cores of a modified genre system.

As noted in the methods section above, the DBSCAN algorithm is a good
fit for this problem. We can use density-based clustering to select only
those regions of the feature space that contain groups of highly similar
texts and to exclude large swaths of the corpus that are not so closely
aligned.[^16] In principle, this should leave us with a set of clusters
that resemble genres according to our flexible definition.

We begin by performing DBSCAN clustering on the full corpus using the
set of text-only features (that is, excluding publication data and
author gender). This isn't the best match for our most robust
articulation of genre, which clearly does involve social and historical
factors. But by beginning with text-only data, we establish a baseline
against which to evaluate the more complete data set - including the
specific influence of introducing extra-textual information into the
model - while simultaneously probing for strictly textual similarities
that might be interesting in their own right.

The results of DBSCAN clustering on text-only features are shown in
figure 4. The method assigns 657 total volumes  (just under 8% of the
corpus) to 8 distinct clusters.[^17]

::: {#attachment_568 .image style="max-width: 660px"}
![](http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/fig4.png)

Figure 4. Eight "core" clusters identified by density-based analysis
using the text-only feature set, arranged from earliest average
publication date (purples and blues) to latest (yellows and reds) and
projected into three-dimensional component space. Cluster dates are
calculated relative to the average for all listed clusters (1943.0),
which is later than the full corpus mean publication date (1936.6).
:::

Three features are notable in the output. First, as Ted Underwood has
also found in recent computational work on literary genre, we observe
that detective fiction shows strong internal consistency, with the
result that it is comparatively easy to distinguish from other
genres.[^18] This fact is most clearly visible in clusters 2, 3, and 5.
The former comprises (almost) exclusively mysteries by the prolific
mid-century writer and activist Rex Stout, the serial and esoteric
nature of whose work likely explains its relative independence.[^19]
Cluster 3 contains hard-boiled detective and crime fiction by Mickey
Spillane, George Harmon Coxe, Donald E. Westlake, and others. The larger
cluster 5 includes texts by many of the leading practitioners of the
genre, including Elmore Leonard, Sue Grafton, Marcia Muller, Charles
Willeford, and Stuart M. Kaminsky, as well as a handful of
detective-adjacent authors such as Philip K. Dick and Robert Ludlum.
It's a notably recent cluster (average publication date, 1980) and a
very predominantly male-authored one, Grafton and Muller's inclusion
notwithstanding. In content, the texts use very little of the older,
more descriptive vocabulary collected in the first principal component
of the topic model, leaning more heavily on components 2, 4, and
(especially) 5, each of which skews later and toward action, interior
settings, and the material trappings of detective work (guns, phones,
cars, detectives, police). Component 5 also includes some sentimental
terms ("love," "heart," "God," and "death" give a flavor), in line with
the suggestion that detective fiction, for all its association with
calculation and masculine emotional reserve, also functions through an
important if covert use of feeling.[^20]

The second notable feature in figure 4 is the large cluster 0, which
skews toward novels published in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. It contains many important regionalist writers of the period,
including Kate Chopin, Hamlin Garland, Booth Tarkington, Rebecca Harding
Davis, George Washington Cable, and Mark Twain, as well as texts by less
strongly regionalist-identified authors such as Sinclair Lewis, Edith
Wharton, William Dean Howells (represented by a single volume, among his
34 included in the corpus), Katherine Anne Porter and an early volume of
James A. Michener's. It is also, however, home to an unexpectedly large
amount of postwar science fiction: three volumes by Ursula Le Guin, two
from Philip K. Dick, five by L. Ron Hubbard, many more by less
well-known writers, plus thrillers by Michael Crichton, Patricia
Highsmith, and Robert Ludlum.

Cluster 0 is distinguished by form and setting more strongly than are
other clusters. Its books tend toward fairly average reading level
scores, which, given the marked inverse correlation between reading
level and publication date, means that the earlier volumes have somewhat
low reading level values relative to others published during their time,
while the later entries are comparatively difficult in the postwar era.
These books also generally have lower verb fractions and less pre-1150
diction: they are (comparatively) heavy on description rather than
action and use more Latinate vocabulary than their contemporaries. Most
strikingly, they make little use of any of the three geographic
components, meaning that they avoid the locations that dominate most
fiction in the corpus. This makes sense as a further covert link between
regionalist and science fiction, both of which genres are typically and
importantly concerned with obscure or imaginary places outside those
treated in other types of literature.

Even the small amount of more literary fiction that finds its way into
cluster 0 fits the mold: John Okada's *No-No Boy* and Gil Scott-Heron's
*The Nigger Factory* combine regionally distinctive elements with the
slightly obscure diction and parabolic structure characteristic of
science fiction. Indeed, a potential link between regionalist,
minoritarian, and science fiction across the twentieth century is likely
to be an area of rewarding investigation, one that extends work by
Fredric Jameson, Mark McGurl, and the handful of critics who have
addressed science fiction as a specifically racialized form.[^21]

Finally, cluster 6 stands out as the model's most obviously literary
postwar agglomeration. It contains exclusively volumes published from
the fifties through the eighties and is marked, as expected for
contemporary texts, by little use of topic component 1 (older,
sentimental vocabulary). The books lean more heavily on components 6 and
10 (domestic life in urban settings), as well as on geographic component
1 (New York and the eastern U.S.), while avoiding geo component 3
(Europe). They tend to be longer than average, especially for postwar
texts, but, as is common for more recent fiction, not notably complex at
the sentence level. It is in this cluster that we find Saul Bellow,
Stanley Elkin, Wallace Stegner (writing in his non-Western mode), Paul
Theroux, Leon Uris, Jane Smiley, and, tellingly, Marge Piercy's classic,
New York-based social dystopia *Woman on the Edge of Time*. This is
another instance in which we see speculative fiction assorting with
mainstream literary fiction, though here without the broad historical
span that characterized cluster 0. On the whole, cluster 6 appears to
identify the strain of familial, domestic, memoir-like fiction, often
with a satirical edge, that has risen to particular prominence in the
postwar period.

Still, we should note that many of the corpus texts that critics would
typically identify as canonically literary - from Henry James and Willa
Cather to Thomas Pynchon and Joyce Carol Oates - are absent from cluster
6 and from the text-only model as a whole. The DBSCAN algorithm, in
combination with the selected set of text-only features, produces a
model that identifies classical genre fiction - especially the detective
story, mysteries, crime fiction, and certain types of science fiction -
quite strongly, along with prewar regionalist writing that includes many
of the most prominent American authors of the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries. It suggests affinities between earlier regionalism
and later science fiction and minoritarian writing, though the limits of
the corpus curtail our ability to explore race and regionalism more
fully.

### **Adding social data** {#adding-social-data style="text-align: center;"}

As useful as is the text-only model, it specifically excludes basic
social and historical information that we have good reason to believe
rightly influences existing treatments of genre. Some of this
extra-textual information makes its way into the results above by the
textual back door, since there are correlations between certain
text-level features and the excluded data (as shown in figure 3). 
Nevertheless, it is valuable to recalculate and evaluate the model over
the full data set, both to reflect more closely the multifaceted theory
of genre offered at the outset and to assess the impact on the model as
a whole of adding small amounts of non-textual information.

Figure 5 summarizes the output of the DBSCAN algorithm over the full
data set, including publication dates and author genders (where known).
The algorithm assigns 685 total volumes (8% of the corpus) to 11
non-overlapping clusters.

::: {#attachment_571 .image style="max-width: 660px"}
![](http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/fig5.png)

Figure 5. Eleven clusters identified by density-based analysis using the
full feature set, arranged from earliest average publication date
(purples and blues) to latest (yellows and reds) and projected into
two-dimensional component space. Cluster dates are calculated relative
to the average for all listed clusters (1951.8), which is later than the
full corpus mean publication date (1936.6) and than the mean publication
date of volumes in the text-only output (1943.0, figure 4). Two
dimensions are used here, rather than the three in figure 4, to maximize
readability in each case.
:::

Among these 11 clusters, a few trends stand out. For one thing, the
clusters mirror the bimodal publication date distribution of the corpus
itself; there is a set of clusters centered in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth century, and another set in the 1970s and '80s. There's
almost nothing in the middle (other than Rex Stout), a result that
mirrors the text-only output.[^22] And recall that, although publication
date does enter directly into this version of the model, it's only very
lightly weighted (about 3%) as a feature in its own right. Books at the
extreme ends of the corpus's historical range seem to supply some of the
most distinctive formations.

Also notable is the amount of detective and crime fiction, again
corresponding closely to the text-only result. Fully four of the
clusters - together containing 115 volumes - fall almost exclusively
within that genre. Two of the four (numbers 5 and 6 in figure 5) trend
toward the early postwar period, centered around 1960 and containing
texts by Mickey Spillane, Earl Stanley Garner, and - again in a cluster
all his own - Rex Stout. The other two (numbers 9 and 10) are relatively
small, come later, and are split by both geography and gender. Cluster
10 is entirely male-authored and New York-oriented, with heavy weights
on component 1 of the geographic feature (recall that the geographic
components describe, in loose overview, New York, California, and
Europe). Cluster 10 is also, however, high on simple terms, generally of
low reading score, and with topical content that runs toward the
sentimental and romantic. Its authors are largely unknown, as is perhaps
not surprising for a group producing short, easy-reading, sentimental
genre fiction. The other contemporary detective cluster isn't strictly a
detective cluster at all; it's built around the mysteries of Sue
Grafton's alphabet series and the work of Marcia Muller. These are books
set in the American West and that, while heavy on murder and mystery
content, lack the quantity of direct reference to police procedures that
helps to identify detective fiction proper. Together, clusters 9 and 10
are most directly comparable to cluster 5 in the text-only model; adding
extra-textual information appears to reveal a potential split in postwar
detective fiction not only between male and female-authored texts, but
also between the subgenres of detection and mystery.

The large contemporary cluster, number 7, also bears mentioning. Its 173
volumes are exclusively male-authored (or by authors of unknown gender)
and share a significant investment in martial themes, both in war
narratives and in accounts of crime. The writers are mostly obscure,
though there are a handful of titles by Dick, Elmore Leonard, and a
single entry from Robert Ludlum. Recalling that author gender accounts
for just over 3% of the total feature weights, it is striking that these
clusters separate so cleanly along gender lines, though we recall having
observed a similar, if less stark, division in the text-only output.

Taken together, these detective, mystery, and crime clusters help to
indicate the kind of objects and relations on which the method continues
to perform well, just as it did in the absence of extra-textual
information: tightly typified novels written close together in time,
sharing a distinctive geography, and often segregated by author gender
to a significant extent. It seems fair, again, to call this genre
fiction in the most conventional sense. These density-identified groups
collectively are also meaningful outliers, containing as they do fewer
than 10% of the full corpus - a fact that will become especially
relevant below.[^23]

Our intuition that we've landed on a genre-finding method is
strengthened by several of the earliest groupings in the full-data
model. Cluster 1, for instance, appears to map directly onto
turn-of-the-last-century sentimental fiction by women: short, relatively
easy reading that is low on action (as measured by verb fraction) and
loads heavily on component 1 of the topic model (containing love, faces,
eyes, and absolutely nothing of police or offices). Interestingly,
though, among the mostly little-known female authors in the cluster we
find Kate Chopin, Paul Lawrence Dunbar, Hamlin Garland, and Edith
Wharton's *Ethan Frome*. It is not a shock to see these books linked to
the sentimental tradition, though Wharton's book is something of an
exception in the existing criticism and may profit from revisitation in
light of this link.

The larger early cluster, number 0, is more difficult to characterize.
It is heavily male, contains sentimental content at levels only slightly
below cluster 1, and similarly privileges long, descriptive, Latinate
sentences. It's notably regionalist, with many books loading negatively
on all three of the geographic components, suggesting a focus on
locations outside the mainstream of American fiction. This tendency is
reinforced by the group's few canonical entries, which include Mark
Twain's *Pudd'nhead Wilson*, George Washington Cable's *Old Creole
Days*, Hamlin Garland's *A Spoil of Office* (subtitled "A Story of the
American West"), and Booth Tarkington's *A Gentleman from Indiana*.
Unlike the text-only case, this regionalist cluster, in addition to
being strongly split by gender, does not stretch to include later
science fiction, the most probable explanation being that the direct use
of publication dates as a feature discourages aggregation across longer
time spans. Depending on one's views concerning the proper historical
limits of individual genres, this fact may represent a bug or a feature
of the extended model. I'm inclined to see it as valuable in most
instances, representing more closely existing mainstream critical
practice with respect to periodization. But it's also a reminder that
feature selection matters; computational models work on the data we
engineer for them, and our engineering is part of the interpretive
process because it embeds assumptions about the phenomena in question.

So we have, according to the full-data model, female-authored
sentimental fiction and male-authored regionalism in the older reaches
of the corpus, and gendered varieties of detective and mystery fiction
toward the contemporary end of the spectrum. Science fiction is in this
case surprisingly absent from the scheme as a genre unto itself, perhaps
because its content is insufficiently standardized - and its imagined
geography too varied or fanciful - to assort tightly once gender and
publication history are introduced as explicit factors. Pieces of sci-fi
are, however, rolled together with detective fiction in some
instances.[^24] In any case, the DBSCAN algorithm applied to this corpus
and set of engineered features seems to be good at identifying and
anatomizing the varieties of highly typified genre literature that we
most associate with the term.

What are we to make, then, of the last large cluster that it produces,
which contains more than 170 volumes, exclusively by men, including many
of the most canonical living or recently-deceased writers of serious
literary fiction? The group in question - cluster 8 - covers books by
John Steinbeck, Saul Bellow, John Updike, John Cheever, Richard Yates,
Kurt Vonnegut, Don DeLillo, Padgett Powell, Tim O'Brien, Gil
Scott-Heron, Paul Theroux, Walker Percy and, for good measure, James
Michener, George R. R. Martin, Stephen King, L. Ron Hubbard, and Elie
Wiesel. If we hadn't just walked through the rest of the full-data and
text-only models, one might suspect a simple mistake; no critic, I think
it's safe to say, would identify this group of writers as working in a
shared genre, nor, indeed, as having much in common beyond the facts of
their demography and renown. But they do indeed share notable features:
they write books of above-average length, devote more than average
attention to the American West (in part because they write later in the
twentieth century, when attention in general shifts westward), and
revive aspects of older fiction (higher reading levels, less aversion to
description and emotion) toward the end of the century.

It's less interesting, however, to characterize a set of books that are
already well known than it is to think about the implications of their
algorithmic identifiability and about the canonical contemporary fiction
that isn't included here. It's no surprise, of course, to find that a
version of the postwar canon is dominated by dead white men. Yet the
writers identified in this case are usually thought to have produced
quite varied texts, notwithstanding a few identifiable subgroups of the
Updike-Cheever-Yates sort. It is striking, then, to see them sort
together via a method that specifically excludes groups heterogeneous in
content and form. A method, in fact, that recognizes the significant
diversity of much modernist literature, of contemporary romance fiction,
and of most Af-Am lit - finding them insufficiently uniform to
constitute any high-density cluster - but is really good at identifying
codified genre fiction. If we believe the results, it is hard not to
conclude that many "serious" contemporary white male writers constitute
a group both as internally consistent and as finally atypical of the
larger literary field as are Sue Grafton mysteries or
late-nineteenth-century sentimental and didactic fiction.

Still, cluster 8 is a long way from representing the full postwar canon.
What's missing from this genre-like group? Women and writers of color
(Gil Scott-Heron excepted), obviously; Toni Morrison, Alice Walker,
Ralph Ellison, Ishmael Reed, Samuel Delaney, and James Baldwin are all
excluded, as are Margaret Atwood, Eudora Welty, Danielle Steele, Jackie
Collins, Joyce Carol Oates, Louise Erdrich, Flannery O'Connor, Joan
Didion, Mary Gordon, Barbara Kingsolver, and Pearl S. Buck. A few pretty
canonical white male authors are absent, too, including Thomas Pynchon,
E. L. Doctorow, Mario Puzo, Norman Mailer, and Philip Roth. Text by all
of these authors are present in the corpus, but absent from cluster 8
and, indeed, from nearly all of the other clusters.

There are two conclusions one might draw from the observed pattern of
inclusion in (and exclusion from) cluster 8. On one hand, it is possible
to emphasize the coherence of this group of texts and to see it as
supporting an older and more conservative view of literary value. This
approach would note that many of the books that critics have treated as
worthy of academic attention occupy a distinct generic space, that they
are, in short, *different* from the large majority of twentieth-century
fiction. "Better," perhaps, if one works in those terms, though a
hypothetical conservative critic would need to take L. Ron Hubbard and
George R. R. Martin along with Bellow and Updike.

On the other - and, I believe, preferable - hand, one might emphasize
the specifically *generic* coherence of the texts in cluster 8, a
coherence that argues against the anti-generic interpretation of
literary fiction. On this reading, the remarkable, utterly surprising
generic affinity of a large group of highly respected and seriously
studied (mostly) dead (mostly) white men suggests the need for a
reconsideration of variety and diversity as purported hallmarks of
contemporary literary fiction. Critics and scholars, this view argues,
would no more limit their professional purview to detective fiction by
claiming that it is the core of contemporary literary production than
they ought to go on treating Steinbeck, Updike, Vonnegut, DeLillo, and
O'Brien as if those writers were, indeed, figures typical of our
literary moment. They are not; they are representatives of a single,
atypical, highly internally homogeneous group of writers and texts.

Yet one can imagine a syllabus under the heading "Contemporary American
Fiction" including none but texts from cluster 8; it would be limited
and unsatisfactory in obvious ways, but it wouldn't be a joke or a
head-scratching error in the way that listing only Sue Grafton and
Marcia Muller - or Philip K. Dick, Elmore Leonard, and Robert A.
Heinlein - would be. The sooner we realize that these groups are of the
same sort as far as generic specificity is concerned, the better will be
our understanding of the system of contemporary fiction writ large and
the better will we be able to pursue a truly diverse, inclusive, and
intellectually ambitious formulation of the literary field.

A final point bears mentioning. The differences between the text-only
and full-data models are modest but, in some instances, important. The
text-only model suggests a continuity between early regionalism and
postwar science fiction that the full-data model does not detect. The
full-data model highlights tendencies toward historical and gender
specificity within genres that the text-only model contains but does not
foreground. And the full-data model helps us see and understand the
stubborn exclusion of women and minorities from the contemporary
literary canon. Adding a limited amount of social and historical
information to the otherwise strictly textual feature set produces
output that, unsurprisingly, enlarges the historical and social skews
that are detectable using textual features alone. These differences of
emphasis are neither good nor bad in isolation, though they do increase
our confidence that the method is behaving as expected by shifting its
output in response to changing input. We should be clear, though, that
the incorporation of extra-textual data does not introduce a distortion
of an otherwise true or correct textual model, unless one believes *as
an interpretive stance* that texts ought to be studied in isolation from
the circumstances of their production and reception - a position that
has nothing to do with the use of computation as an aide to literary
analysis and one at odds with most contemporary critical practice.

In the case of genre in twentieth-century American fiction, unsupervised
learning methods applied to mixed thematic, formal, and bibliographic
textual features have allowed us to confirm the identifiability and
coherence of recognizably generic fiction in a large literary corpus.
While we do not yet see strong evidence of a *Program Era*-like division
of specifically literary fiction into a handful of well-defined
subgenres, the methods employed have lead to the surprising discovery of
a genre-like cluster of late-century novels by prominent, almost
uniformly white, male writers. This last cluster sheds light on the
extent to which the contemporary fiction canon functions as a genre unto
itself and suggests the continuing need for a more expansive treatment
of literary production in the twentieth century and beyond if critics'
assessments are to reflect sociotextual artifacts beyond the limits and
conventions of a single genre.

 

 

 

 

 

[^1]: For Frye's formalist version of genre, see especially essay four
    of his *Anatomy of Criticism* (Princeton: Princeton UP, 1957). For
    Genette's more content-oriented approach, see *The Architext: An
    Introduction*. Translated by Jane E. Lewin, forward by Robert
    Scholes, (Berkeley: U California P, 1992). Williams's socioaesthetic
    formulation is in part three, chapter six of *Marxism and
    Literature* (Oxford: Oxford UP, 1977).

[^2]: Mark McGurl, *The Program Era: Postwar Fiction and the Rise of
    Creative Writing* (Cambridge: Harvard UP, 2009).

[^3]: Caren Irr, *Toward the Geopolitical Novel: U.S. Fiction in the
    Twenty-First Century* (New York: Columbia UP, 2013).

[^4]: My thanks to Richard So for this observation.

[^5]: A corpus listing and related project data are available in the
    *CA* dataverse.

[^6]: Supervised learning tasks can, of course, also include confidence
    measures among their outputs, including the possibility of
    assignment to more than one category. The difference between
    supervised and unsupervised techniques is thus emphatically not a
    matter of objective vs. interpretable results (which would be to
    confuse the nature of interpretation). For an example of using
    supervised classification accuracy as an input to critical analysis,
    see Ted Underwood, \"[The Life Cycles of
    Genres](http://culturalanalytics.org/2016/05/the-life-cycles-of-genres/),\" *CA:
    Journal of Cultural Analytics* (23 May 2016).

[^7]: M. David Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan, "Latent
    Dirichlet Allocation," *Journal of Machine Learning Research* 3
    (2003): 993-1022 ; Andrew McCallum Kachites, "MALLET: A Machine
    Learning for Language
    Toolkit," [http://mallet.cs.umass.edu](http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/).
    2002.

[^8]: The 20 principal components (PCs) capture 52% of the underlying
    variance in the 200 topics.

[^9]: Mendelson's insightful and influential treatment of the
    encyclopedic novel is "Encyclopedic Narrative: From Dante to
    Pynchon," *MLN* 91 (1976): 1267-1275. My own analysis of literary
    encyclopedism is found in chapter four of *Revolution: The Event in
    Postwar Fiction* (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 2016).

[^10]: Ted Underwood and Jordan Sellers, "The Emergence of Literary
    Diction," *Journal of Digital Humanities* 1.2 (2012).

[^11]: Matthew Wilkens, "The Geographic Imagination of Civil War-Era
    American Fiction," *American Literary History* 25.4 (2013): 803-840.

[^12]: Recall that the corpus consists entirely of U.S. fiction. More
    than 60% of named location occurrences fall within the United
    States. Indeed, New York and locations therein are the single most
    frequently occurring area.

[^13]: Ester, Martin et al, "A Density-Based Algorithm for Discovering
    Clusters in Large Spatial Databases with Nois," In *Proceedings of
    2nd International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
    (KDD-96),* (AAAI Press: 1996), 226-231.

[^14]: The number of clusters was set well above the "best" result (*k*
    = 15-20) as measured by silhouette score to minimize agglomeration
    errors, albeit at the expense of splitting errors. The idea is that
    it is relatively easy to identify and merge erroneously split
    clusters, but very difficult to disaggregate a small number of
    heterogeneous clusters.

[^15]: The *k*-means results, in fact, are notable for the relative
    uniformity of the size of the output clusters, a fact related to the
    data's predominantly even distribution across high-dimensional
    feature space.

[^16]: To use a geographic metaphor, you might think of *k*-means as
    answering the question "to what province does this town belong";
    every town will be assigned to one province or another. DBSCAN
    answers the question "is this town part of a significant urban
    agglomeration?"

[^17]: The large number of outlier texts in the DBSCAN output indicates
    a sparse population of texts in the feature space. Recall that all
    clustering operations were performed on a dimension-reduced version
    of the input feature set (27 dimensions, in the present case,
    reduced to 10 via PCA). Sparsity is desirable here because it allows
    us to identify only those subsets of the corpus that resemble one
    another very closely.

[^18]: Ted Underwood, \"[The Life Cycle of
    Genres](http://culturalanalytics.org/2016/05/the-life-cycles-of-genres/)\".

[^19]: Cluster 2 in figure 4 contains a single non-Stout volume: *The
    Bilbao Looking Glass*, also a mystery, by Charlotte MacLeod.

[^20]: For a recent, genealogical treatment of emotion in detective and
    crime fiction, see Leonard Cassuto's *Hard-Boiled Sentimentality:
    The Secret History of American Crime Stories* (Columbia UP, 2009).

[^21]: On science fiction and race, see especially André Carrington's
    recent André M. *Speculative Blackness: The Future of Race in
    Science Fiction* (Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 2016) and DeWitt
    Kilgore's *Astrofuturism: Science, Race, and Visions of Utopia in
    Space* (Philadelphia: U of Pennsylvania P, 2003).

[^22]: Note that the average per-cluster publication dates supplied in
    the legends of figures 4 and 5 are calculated independently relative
    to the mean dates of the volumes in each output set; because these
    means are different (the average publication date of volumes in
    figure 5 is 8.8 years later than figure 4), the cluster ages in
    figures 4 and 5 are not directly comparable.

[^23]: It may be helpful to think of the clusters identified here as
    similar to galaxies: rare, high-density agglomerations embedded in
    mostly empty space.

[^24]: Compare Underwood's results in "The Life Cycles of Genres"
    Underwood investigates science fiction using supervised methods and
    a different feature set, finding important signs of homogeneity
    within that genre.
