---
author: Ted Underwood and the NovelTM Research Group
date: '10.25.16'
shortauthor: Ted Underwood and the NovelTM Research Group
shorttitle: Genre Theory and Historicism
title: Genre Theory and Historicism
---

::: {.entry .print-only}
::: {#post-607 .post-607 .post .type-post .status-publish .format-standard .has-post-thumbnail .hentry .category-articles}
###### *Article DOI: [10.22148/16.008](https://doi.org/10.22148/16.008)*

###### *PDF: [10.31235/osf.io/dav64](https://dx.doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/dav64)*

###### *Journal ISSN: 2371-4549*

###### *Cite: Ted Underwood and the NovelTM Research Group, "Genre Theory and Historicism," Journal of Cultural Analytics. Oct. 25, 2016. DOI: [10.31235/osf.io/dav64](https://dx.doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/dav64)*

 

### An Introduction to a new Cluster on Genre {#an-introduction-to-a-newcluster-on-genre style="text-align: center;"}

### by the [NovelTM](http://novel-tm.ca/) Research Group {#by-the-noveltm-research-group style="text-align: center;"}

Genre is a word whose time has come [---]{.emdash} and gone
[---]{.emdash} and might now, perhaps, be coming back again. Debates
about particular literary kinds have been common in literary criticism
since Aristotle's Poetics, but they acquired a new intensity and
reflexivity in the third quarter of the twentieth century, as
structuralists and post-structuralists struggled to redefine the concept
of genre itself. From Northrop Frye's *Anatomy of Criticism* (1957)
through Jacques Derrida's "Law of Genre" (1980), genre theory gave
scholars a way to connect literary works to durable cultural patterns
[---]{.emdash} or challenge the possibility of that connection.[^1]

As Robyn Warhol points out in her introduction to *The Work of Genre*
(2011), the concept of genre has spent much of the last thirty years in
eclipse. This is not to say that readers [---]{.emdash} or publishers
[---]{.emdash} ever stopped dividing literary works into epics, lyrics,
mysteries, and young adult dystopias. Readers can hardly open a novel
without thinking about genre, consciously or unconsciously. As John Frow
explains, "generic structure both enables and restricts meaning, and is
a basic condition for meaning to take place."[^2] But genre has become
the kind of critical term that scholars use casually, and with an
implicit shrug. Several observers have traced this shift to the
ascendance of historicism in literary study. It began to seem "downright
wrong," Warhol suggests, "to detach form, structure, and theme from a
text's specific historical moment, or to sketch out taxonomies of
literary types in the abstract."[^3]

One can of course reconcile genre theory with historicism by treating
genre as a historical construct. Genres can be viewed, not as natural
literary kinds, but as generalizations about the organization of
literary production or reception inferred from evidence in a particular
period. Today, some version of this theory is often taken as an implicit
starting-point for conversation. But it is a theory so flexible that it
provides little guidance on many questions, not least the question of
how genres resonate across historical epochs, of why, as Rita Felski
puts it, "past texts still matter and how they speak to us now."[^4] As
John Rieder has remarked, theories that identify genre with historical
practices of categorization can lead to "a kind of tautology, an
assertion that the genre is whatever the various discursive agents
involved in its production, distribution, and reception say it is."[^5]
That premise will not necessarily tell literary historians how to
proceed when different observers, or periods, disagree. Nor can it
adequately account for the flash of recognition often experienced by
both lay and scholarly readers when encountering works written centuries
ago.

For instance, if genres emerge from a period's own practices of
categorization, why are so many books written about nineteenth century
"science fiction"? We inherit the term from Hugo Gernsback in 1929; a
strictly historical theory of genre might not use it to describe
literary movements before that date. Should historians let Mary Shelley
and Jules Verne go their separate ways, as nineteenth-century readers
mostly did? Or can Gernsback's term be allowed to retrospectively define
a previously nameless set of similarities that binds the pulps of the
1920s to earlier traditions of lost-world romance, dream vision, and
utopia? Contemporary genre theory doesn't provide an answer, or even a
clear criterion that we could use to find one. So critics confronted
with a dilemma like this often find it simpler just to keep writing
about nineteenth-century "science fiction," while adding air quotes to
the phrase. Genres are acknowledged to be "fluid and tenuous
constructions"[^6] at the same time as they remain rhetorically
indispensable; the word genre itself sometimes seems to have acquired
air quotes and a shrug.

And yet, there has been a resurgence of critical writing about genre in
the last ten years. The reasons may have as much to do with popular
culture as they do with new critical theories or methods. The things
that used to be called "genre fiction" are newly central to cultural
production. Warring comic-book franchises have acquired enormous market
share, while cable channels are subdividing into long tails capable of
targeting every possible variant of post-apocalyptic teen romance and
self-conscious vampire comedy. It is perhaps not surprising that science
fiction and fantasy have become as important to genre theory as "the
epic" used to be, or that the concept of the "microgenre" is one of the
salient critical innovations of the twenty-teens.[^7]

Computational methods of analysis have arrived in the humanities just in
time to take advantage of this proliferation of categories. When Netflix
created 77,000 new microgenres [---]{.emdash}including "Emotional
Fight-the-System Documentaries" and "Foreign Satanic Stories from the
1980s" [---]{.emdash} it was almost inevitable that Alexis Madrigal
would try to reverse-engineer the process that constructed them.[^8]
Computational methods of clustering (and data provided by Spotify) have
similarly encouraged Glenn McDonald to visualize musical microgenres in
[*Every Noise at Once*](http://everynoise.com/engenremap.html).

Emerging work in the field of computational literary criticism has
similarly begun to tackle the question of genre and the social
organization of texts. Researchers have shown that computers can
reproduce and predict human judgments about categories of fiction[^9] as
well as model market-based decision-making.[^10] But we are still a long
way from having more generalizable things to say about the novel as the
so-called "genre of genres," as one of the more complex textual forms
that can be stitched together from other forms to such a degree that it
has "the appearance of being merely a secondary syncretic unification of
other seemingly primary verbal genres."[^11]

This question of the novel's coherence, of the ways in which its
grouping organizes its larger social significance as a cultural
artifact, was the animating idea behind the first year of research of
the multi-year project on [Text Mining the Novel](http://novel-tm.ca/).
The essays that resulted take many different approaches to the problem.
Some of them use models of genre in a predictive way, to explore the
boundaries of genres or compare them to each other. Others extract
explanatory insights from computational models, in order to better
understand the role of epistemology or gender in fiction [---]{.emdash}
or the nature of fiction itself. Still others attempt topic modeling or
unsupervised clustering, in order to detect literary genres, or
genre-like patterns, that may have gone unrecognized in critical debate.

In each case, common assumptions about the history of the novel are put
under pressure through the insights offered by a computational
understanding of the problem. Whether it is the question of the
transhistorical coherence of genres like science fiction or detective
fiction (Underwood); the surprising stylistic unity of Dead White Men
that could be considered a genre in its own right (Wilkens); the
eighteenth-century prehistory of the novel as captured through a variety
of market-driven labels such as the tale, romance, or history
(Algee-Hewitt et al); the detection of the philosophically oriented
novel that queries the novel's epistemological foundations (Erlin); the
relationship between gender, character and genre in the classical
realist novel of the nineteenth century (Jockers/Kirilloff); the
grounding of the novel's fictionality in a phenomenological investment
in human encounter and doubt (Piper); or finally, an interrogation of
the ways in which gender and genre theory intersect (Mandell), each of
the pieces in this cluster offer new arguments about the novel's history
and the place of categorization in that history.

It would be a mistake to assume that these authors have resorted to
numbers in an attempt to make the concept of genre more "objective."
Numbers have many uses: they can help a scholar compare large groups of
examples, for instance, or describe a continuous gradient. But they
aren't inherently objective, any more than words are. On the contrary,
numbers will be used here to construct models, confessedly imperfect
representations of cultural practices. As Andrew Piper has mentioned in
his introduction to the first issue of *Cultural Analytics*, this
modeling process is a way to acknowledge assumptions and reflect
self-consciously on "the contingencies of knowledge."[^12] Indeed,
because computational techniques frequently generate continuous
probability distributions or make use of multiple clustering algorithms,
they can be particularly effective in illuminating the fluidity of
genre, thus supporting an understanding of genre in terms of family
resemblances rather than fixed taxonomies.[^13]

But if *objectivity* is the wrong word, it may still be fair to say that
these essays are, collectively, searching for a way to put literary
conversation about genre on a firmer footing than it presently occupies.
The timeless taxonomy of modes and genres that Northrop Frye once hoped
to sketch is not likely to make a comeback. Genres are clearly
historical constructions. But our current repertoire of critical
strategies doesn't always help us untangle their histories. Instead, the
premise that a genre is whatever historical actors say it is tends to
dissolve the history of genre into a maze of tautologically valid (but
conflicting) assertions made by "writers, producers, distributors,
marketers, readers, fans, critics and other discursive agents."[^14]

Although genres are perspectival categories, we can aim for something
better than a mere transcription of participants' opinions. Even -- and
perhaps especially! -- historicist critics need to be skeptical about
the testimony of contemporary observers. Writers deeply immersed in a
particular system of production may pass silently over boundaries that
seem self-evident. Conversely, an observer with a personal stake in
recent debates may exaggerate the importance of relatively slight formal
differences. To think skeptically about historical testimony, even
scholars who understand genres as historical institutions will need
another point of comparison.

Text analysis may not provide a complete picture of the history of
genre, but it does give us a second reference point [---]{.emdash} a
touchstone that we can use to unpack historical assertions about genre,
or compare them to each other. This kind of evidence could make
conversation about genre more interesting than it has been for the last
thirty years, simply by giving historicism something to push against. In
fact, it's possible to combine historical testimony and text in a single
model. Instead of relying strictly on formal templates, or strictly on
the conflicting claims of historical actors, we can work in a more
dynamic way [---]{.emdash} putting textual and historical evidence in
dialogue with each other, and allowing new insights to emerge from the
tension between them. That is what we hope to have fostered here: a mode
of inquiry about genre that revives substantive debate, and avoids
falling back on a nominalistic shrug.
:::
:::

[^1]: Northrop Frye, *Anatomy of Criticism* (Princeton: Princeton
    University Press, 1957); Jacques Derrida and Avital Ronell, "The Law
    of Genre," *Critical Inquiry* 7, no. 1 (1980): 55-81.

[^2]: John Frow, *Genre*, 2nd. Ed. (London: Routledge, 2015), 10.

[^3]: Robyn Warhol, \"[Genre
    Regenerated](http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/text-idx?c=acls;cc=acls;rgn=div2;view=text;idno=heb90055.0001.001;node=heb90055.0001.001%3A4.1),\"
    In *The Work of Genre: Selected Essays from the English Institute*,
    ed. Robyn Warhol (Cambridge, MA: English Institute in Collaboration
    with ACLS, 2011).

[^4]: Rita Felski, "Context Stinks," *New Literary History* 42, no. 4
    (2011): 577.

[^5]: John Rieder, "On Defining SF, or Not: Genre Theory, SF, and
    History," *Science Fiction Studies* 37, no. 2 (2010): 191.

[^6]: Sherryl Vint and Mark Bould, "There Is No Such Thing As Science
    Fiction," In *Reading Science Fiction*, ed. James Gunn, Marleen
    Barr, and Matthew Candelaria (New York: Palgrave, 2009), 48.

[^7]: For reflection on the current spurt of generic hybridity, see Gary
    Wolfe, *Evaporating Genres: Essays on Fantastic Literature*
    (Middletown: Wesleyan University Press, 2011). Molly O'Donnell and
    Anne H. Stevens are currently organizing a [*Big Book of
    Microgenres*](https://call-for-papers.sas.upenn.edu/node/66105).

[^8]: Alexis C. Madrigal, \"[How Netflix Reverse-Engineered
    Hollywood](http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/01/how-netflix-reverse-engineered-hollywood/282679/),\"
    *The Atlantic*, January 2, 2014.

[^9]: Sarah Allison, Ryan Heuser, Matthew Jockers, Franco Moretti,
    Michael Witmore, "Quantitative Formalism: An Experiment," Stanford
    Literary Lab, https://litlab.stanford.edu/LiteraryLabPamphlet1.pdf;
    Matthew L. Jockers, *Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary
    History* (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2013), 63-104;
    Mariona Coll Ardanuy and Caroline Sporleder, "Structure-based
    Clustering of Novels," In *Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on
    Computational Linguistics for Literature, *CLfL (EACL 2014): 31-39;
    Paul Vierthaler, \"[Fiction and History: Polarity and Stylistic
    Gradience in Late Imperial Chinese
    Literature](http://culturalanalytics.org/2016/05/fiction-and-history-polarity-and-stylistic-gradience-in-late-imperial-chinese-literature/),\"
    CA: Journal of Cultural Analytics (2016): "Fiction and History:
    Polarity and Stylistic Gradience in Late Imperial Chinese
    Literature".

[^10]: Vikas Ganjigunte Ashok, Song Feng, and Yejin Choi, "Success with
    Style: Using Writing Style to Predict the Success of Novels," In
    *Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
    Language Processing* (EMNLP 2013): 1753-1764; Andrew Piper and Eva
    Portelance, \"[How Cultural Capital Works: Prizewinning Novels,
    Bestsellers, and the Time of
    Reading](http://post45.research.yale.edu/2016/05/how-cultural-capital-works-prizewinning-novels-bestsellers-and-the-time-of-reading/),\"
    Post45 (2016) ; Jody Archer and Matthew Jockers, *The Bestseller
    Code: Anatomy of the Blockbuster Novel* (New York: St. Martin's,
    2016).

[^11]: M. M. Bakhtin, *The Dialogic Imagination*, trans. Caryl Emerson
    and Michael Holquist, (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1981),
    321.

[^12]: Andrew Piper, \"[There Will Be
    Numbers](http://culturalanalytics.org/2016/05/there-will-be-numbers/.),\"
    *Journal of Cultural Analytics*, May 23, 2016.

[^13]: On genres as family resemblances, see Alastair Fowler, *Kinds of
    Literature: An Introduction to the Theory of Genres and Modes*
    (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982).

[^14]: Vint and Bould, "No Such Thing As Science Fiction," 48.
