---
author: 'Dan Jurafsky, Victor Chahuneau, Bryan R. Routledge, Noah A. Smith'
date: '10.18.16'
shortauthor: 'Dan Jurafsky et al.'
shorttitle: Linguistic Markers of Status in Food Culture
title: |
    Linguistic Markers of Status in Food Culture: Bourdieu's Distinction in
    a Menu Corpus
---

::: {.entry .print-only}
::: {#post-526 .post-526 .post .type-post .status-publish .format-standard .has-post-thumbnail .hentry .category-articles}
###### *Peer-Reviewed By: Nathalie Cooke & Anon.*

###### *Clusters: [Food](http://culturalanalytics.org/2016/10/food/)*

###### *Article DOI: [10.22148/16.007](https://doi.org/10.22148/16.007) *

###### *Dataverse DOI: [10.7910/DVN/QMLCPD](http://dx.doi.org/10.7910/DVN/QMLCPD)*

###### *PDF: [10.31235/osf.io/j9tga](https://dx.doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/j9tga)*

###### *Journal ISSN: 2371-4549*

###### *Cite: Dan Jurafsky, Victor Chahuneau, Bryan R. Routledge, and Noah A. Smith, "Linguistic Markers of Status in Food Culture: Bourdieu's Distinction in a Menu Corpus," Journal of Cultural Analytics. Oct. 18, 2016. DOI: [10.31235/osf.io/j9tga](https://dx.doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/j9tga)*

 

Food is a core element of culture, whose link with identity and
socio-economic class has made it an important area of cultural research.
[^1] In his ground-breaking study, Pierre Bourdieu noted that
"oppositions similar in structure to those found in cultural practices
also appear in eating habits." [^2] His work established deep
associations linking food culture, and taste more generally, with social
class and other aspects of identity, demonstrating the economic and
social determinants of taste and their role in representing
*distinctions*, differences between groups.

These implicit assumptions about taste can nonetheless be difficult to
tease out from social investigations, such as the careful survey
analysis or explicit interviews that Bourdieu conducted in the 1960s.
However, there is a more direct window onto implicit assumptions about
culture: the language we use in talking about culture.  Language offers
a powerful tool for observing and quantifying the sometimes unconscious
way that our associations and understandings of culture reflect our
social attitudes and prejudices. Studying social aspects of culture,
however, requires controlling for the great number of confounds that
come along with language.  It's hugely helpful therefore to focus on a
single genre, allowing exploration of a single contextual domain of
language, and to use sufficiently powerful data that digital methods can
be used to control for other confounds.

We propose to study the reflections of Bourdieu's distinction in the
language used on menus of restaurants in the United States. By focusing
on menus, we remove the many possible confounds due to genre: menus
offer a coherent context, one in which food producers are attempting to
advertise their food to consumers, framing it in a way that reflects how
they believe their consumers understand food. Menus cross socio-economic
lines, offering text written by restaurants from the cheapest and most
quotidian to the most expensive, luxurious, and high-status, and
offering very explicit coding of price. Finally, menus are frequent,
allowing us to build a corpus of menus large enough that it is possible
to control for cultural effects like different ethnicities of
restaurants, geographical effects like city or neighborhood, and
linguistic effects like variation in numbers of words and of dishes.

A wide variety of research has drawn on the insights of Bourdieu to
examine the links between, status, class, and culture on food. Building
on this literature, we focus on four aspects in which the differences
between the language used by inexpensive restaurants versus expensive
restaurants on their menus reflects a particular aspect of the framing
of distinction.

The first is the role of *authenticity.* A number of scholars have
studied how expensive or high-status food is portrayed as authentic.
[^3] Beverland and colleagues interviewed luxury winemakers and
consumers, and consumers of Trappist beer brewed in Belgium and the
Netherlands. Both consumers and producers link authenticity with
historicity (talking about the founding of the company), with the
relationship to place (in particular the concept of terroir) and with a
focus on traditional, hand-crafted methods of production. [^4] Johnston
and Bauman looked at every article that appeared in 2004 in four upscale
food magazines (*Bon Appétit, Saveur, Food and Wine*, and *Gourmet*),
showing they present food as authentic by talking about locality and the
regions in which food is produced, by the use of handmade simplicity
rather than industrial production, and by the historicism indicated via
a long tradition of manufacture. [^5] Lakoff performed a careful
discourse analysis comparing a menu from one expensive restaurant (*Chez
Panisse*) with one from an inexpensive one nearby (*The Oriental
Restaurant*), noting among other differences that the expensive menu
contains extensive reference to the provenance of their food on
particular farms. She argues that the references on the menu to local
farms and ranches "that practice ecologically sound agriculture" allow
eating a meal to be an act of 'civic virtue\", suggesting that this kind
of authenticity is also associated with a particular aspect of morality.
[^6]

While authenticity has mainly been considered as a property of
high-status foods, recent work in our labs has also explored the role of
authenticity in signaling less expensive foods. Freedman and Jurafsky
investigated the advertising language on bags of potato chips and the
link between language and the price of the chips. They found that
advertising on expensive chips emphasizes what they called *natural
authenticity*, by mentioning the provenance and quality of the
ingredients (*sea salt, Yukon Gold potatoes*) and the hand processing of
the ingredients (*hand-rake* *every batch*), and using the words
*natural* and *organic*.  Advertising on less expensive chips, by
contrast, was consistent with a different model that they called
*traditional authenticity*, in which food was related to family members,
historicity, and family tradition (*old family recipe, time-honored
tradition*).  They suggested their results are consistent with earlier
work suggesting that working class or lower-middle-class identity is
likely to be based around family and tradition. Similarly, Chahuneau et
al. suggested that inexpensive menus employ *traditional authenticity*,
relating food to family, comfort, and old-fashioned tradition. [^7]

We therefore propose to examine menus to see if they indeed present
these two aspects of authenticity.  Our hypothesis is that more
expensive, higher-status restaurants will be more likely to emphasize
natural authenticity and the provenance of the ingredients on the farm,
while cheaper, lower-status restaurants will be more likely to emphasize
traditional authenticity.

The second aspect of distinction we consider is *educational capital*.
Since education is associated with socioeconomic status, expensive
restaurants, like other advertisers of luxury products, may use
"fancier" words, i.e. ones that are rarer, more morphologically complex,
or drawn from high-status foreign languages. The goal of such language
may be to signal status or target educated consumers, drawing consumers
into believing that the product is consonant with their educational
capital and flattering the consumer by expressing this shared knowledge.
[^8] In his 1963 *Confessions of an Advertising Man* David Ogilvie warns
would-be ad-writers: "Don't use highfalutin language" when you're
talking to a non-highfalutin audience.  Freedman and Jurafsky found that
advertising text on the bags of more expensive potato chips indeed tend
to use words which are longer and more complex. Silverstein analyzed
wine tasting notes, suggesting that aspirational elites self-consciously
use rare or difficult wine-tasting jargon words ('oinoglossia') as an
attempt by to demonstrate their prestige simply through the very act of
using elite words. [^9]

Our hypothesis is that more expensive, higher-status restaurants will
use more complex language, while cheaper, lower-status restaurants will
use simpler language.

The third aspect of distinction we consider is Bourdieu's concept of
*plenty* in the working-class meal. In his study of French society in
the 1960s, Bourdieu noted:

> The working-class meal is characterized by plenty... ."Elastic" and
> "abundant" dishes are brought to the table[---]{.emdash}soups or
> sauces, pasta or potatoes (almost always included among the
> vegetables)[---]{.emdash}and served with a ladle or spoon, to avoid
> too much measuring and counting... [^10]

Bourdieu suggests a framing for working-class meals in which the
"impression of abundance" is important, and in which food should be
simultaneously cheap and "nourishing" or "filling".

Does this same framing of plenty associated with cheaper meals apply to
modern restaurant meals? In a related finding, Lakoff in her comparison
of menus from an expensive restaurant (*Chez Panisse)* versus a cheap
one (*The Oriental Restaurant)* noted that the cheaper restaurant gave
the diner vastly more choices (with a longer menu and choices between
chicken or pork or shrimp, for example). [^11]  Her finding suggests
that inexpensive restaurants may focus on diner choice as an aspect of
plenty: not only does the restaurant focus on offering more food, but
also on offering many more kinds of food.  We therefore hypothesize that
menus of cheaper restaurants will be more likely to give linguistic
indicators of plenty and choice[---]{.emdash}the menu will highlight the
*amount* of food, offering more dishes and offering a greater range of
choices, while menus of expensive restaurants will be less likely to use
this framing.

If so, we would expect a linguistic framing of plenty emphasized more in
cheaper restaurants than in expensive ones.

The fourth aspect of distinction we consider is "implicit signaling of
quality": whether expensive restaurants are likely to be less explicit
in signalling the quality of their products, while cheaper or
middle-priced restaurants are more explicit. Bourdieu, as Ridgeway and
Fisk point out, "comments ... on the insecurity of the (middle class)
petit bourgeois and nouveau riche compared to the upper class 'who ...
have the privilege of not worrying about their distinction.' " [^12]
Liberman suggests that this idea of middle class insecurity might
explain the differences he found among menus of 3 restaurants (cheap,
middle-priced, and expensive) in Philadelphia.  He noted that the middle
priced restaurant had the wordiest menu (with a hamburger described as
"Big Juicy Burger of Buck Run Farm's Grass Fed Beef on our House made
Poppy Seed Bun"). Liberman argued that the elaborate language in middle
priced restaurant menus is used as an index of status, and that the
extensive modifications by words like *juicy* or *peppery* is a mark of
status anxiety. [^13] Liberman's idea is supported by research in
game-theoretic models of advertising which suggests that middle-priced
firms will tend to use explicit advertising and that high-priced firms
will tend to use implicit or "modest" advertising, "counter-signaling",
to distinguish themselves from the middle-priced firms. [^14]

We therefore hypothesize that explicit protestations of quality
(adjectives like "real", "delicious", "crispy", "crunchy") will be more
likely to appear in middle-priced or cheaper restaurants than in
expensive ones.  We focus on adjectives because a wide variety of
researchers have noted that adjectives ("fresh", "crispy", "fluffy",
"buttery") richly populate menus and that customers are more likely to
choose dishes with these words. [^15]

In the next sections we develop measures for these four aspects of
distinction and introduce the corpus we use to evaluate them. In a later
section we also introduce a historical corpus to investigate the
diachronic nature of our hypothesis.

 

### **The corpus** {#the-corpus style="text-align: center;"}

We chose a dataset of menus large enough to investigate the full range
of restaurants, from fast food to luxury restaurants, allowing the
investigation of the linguistic strategies of distinction jointly while
controlling for each other and many potential confounding factors like
the geographical location, the type of food served at the restaurant,
the total number of words, and so on.  We built our dataset by extending
the corpus of Chahuneau et al. (2011), consisting of menus downloaded
from the website *allmenus.com* in 2011 for restaurants in seven cities:
Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, New York, Philadelphia, San Francisco, and
Washington D.C.  They randomly divided the restaurants into 80 percent
for training and 20 percent reserved for evaluation and testing. All the
analyses in this paper are performed on their training dataset. From
this data, we used only restaurants that were characterized on Yelp as
restaurants and bars; thus all delis, groceries, and caterers were
removed from the dataset.

Each menu comprises a set of dishes with names, descriptions, and a
price.  For each restaurant, we use two metadata variables drawn from
the reviewing website *yelp.com*: the restaurant category (type of
food), and the price range, a variable on a four-level scale from \$ to
\$\$\$\$.  We use this Yelp price range (\$, \$\$, \$\$\$, \$\$\$\$) as
our measure of restaurant price class, considering \$\$\$\$ as
upper-socioeconomic-status, \$\$ and \$\$\$ as middle-status, and \$ as
lower status. The Yelp price range is assigned with respect to
restaurant category (a pizza restaurant that is rated as \$\$\$ will be
less expensive than a French restaurant rated \$\$\$), so we control for
category whenever investigating the price range variable.  Because all
the data was automatically downloaded from the web, we also performed a
number of error-checking and correction operations. Dozens of
restaurants did not have restaurant category or price range variables on
Yelp; these were coded by hand. Seven restaurant menus were removed from
the study due to significant errors in price data (caused by typos due
to download errors). We also removed all restaurants with missing menu
data. Finally, because we focus only on food dishes, all drinks (sodas,
alcohol, coffee) are removed from the lists of dishes, by using a
combination of hand-labeling and regular expressions; in total 45,018
menu descriptions of drink items were removed.

The resulting dataset consists of 6511 restaurants and 591,980 dishes.
Table 1 shows the summary statistics of the data. [^16] There is a large
variance in the number of dishes per restaurant (with a mean of 91
dishes and a standard deviation of 83). Many restaurants have few dishes
(the mode is 38) but there is a large tail of restaurants with very long
menus. Each dish is described with an average of 9.1 words, with each
word containing on average 6.3 letters. Table 2 shows the geographical
range of the data; some cities are underrepresented in the sample, and
so in our main regression we add the city as a control variable.

                                       \$     \$\$   \$\$\$   \$\$\$\$
  ------------------------------------ ------ ------ -------- ----------
  Total restaurants                    2203   3311   844      153
  Average number of dishes             114    88     50       48
  Average description length (words)   7.6    10     9.8      9

Table 1. Summary statistics over the entire menu dataset. Description
length is in words. Our dataset only includes food dishes, so the
original menus would have been slightly longer including drinks.

  City               \# Restaurants
  ------------------ ----------------
  Boston             605
  Chicago            480
  Los Angeles        235
  New York           2828
  Philadelphia       624
  San Francisco      1228
  Washington, D.C.   511
  Total              6511

Table 2. Number of restaurants per city in the data set.

 

### **The hypotheses and coding** {#the-hypotheses-and-coding style="text-align: center;"}

To develop a testable measure of the linguistic strategies corresponding
to each aspect of distinction, we mainly measure the number of times
words appear from *lexicons*, lists of words and phrases. Lexicons were
drawn from the previous literature and also from an initial
investigation of the menus, as described below. We also study summary
properties like word length or sentence length.

For **natural versus traditional authenticity** we coded variables
marking the two kinds of authenticity discussed in the Bourdieu-inspired
food and menu literature.

1.  Words and phrases related to the provenance of food (*natural,
    farmhouse, wild caught, grass fed, local, market, farmed, free
    range, heirloom*) derived from the previous literature, [^17] as
    well as our initial investigation of the menus.
2.  Words and phrases related to traditional authenticity drawn from
    Freedman and Jurafsky, as well as all mentions of family members
    (*old fashioned, traditional, family recipe, home style, mom,
    mother, auntie, grandpa, uncle, daddy's)*

For the concept of **plenty** we coded three variables indicative of
Bourdieu's plenty and the related idea of the number of dishes or amount
of choices the restaurant is offering the consumer:

1.  the number of dishes on the menu (we controlled for the fact that
    menus with more dishes also have more words by adding as a control
    factor the number of total words on the menu)
2.  phrases indicative of the extent of consumer choice (*choice of,
    choose, pick, specify, your own, your way, you like, any, add, or)*
3.  phrases vaguely indicative of generous portions (*big, hearty,
    generous, huge, plenty, heaping)*

For **educational capital** we measured the log of the **average word
length** in letters of all words describing all the dishes on the menu. 
Word length has a very strong inverse correlation with word frequency
and a positive correlation with morphological complexity; long words are
thus both rare and complex. Word length is thus the main measure of word
complexity in measures of reading difficulty level like the
Flesch-Kincaid readability test. [^18] Word length is likely a less
accurate proxy for morphological complexity on menus than it is in other
genres, because of the multilingual nature of menus; for example words
in Vietnamese are on average shorter than English, while words in
Italian are longer. However, controlling for the restaurant type (which
generally includes ethnicity) helps somewhat in dealing with this
confound.

For **implicit status** we measured the number of adjectives in the
menus. We ran the Stanford Part-of-Speech Tagger [^19] on all menu
descriptions, producing 5 million tagged words. Many menu descriptions,
especially short ones, had incorrectly tagged words, presumably because
the tagger was not trained on menus. The most frequent such error was
caused by the fact that taggers often interpret long sequences of
capitalized words standing alone as proper names; thus the participle
"steamed" in the phrase "Steamed Little Neck clams" was incorrectly
marked as a proper noun because of the neighboring (correctly tagged)
proper noun "Little Neck". However we found that the majority tag for
most adjectives was in fact correct; cases like "steamed" were tagged
correctly in the vast majority of instances (an instance of the *one*
*sense per discourse* [^20] rule). We therefore labeled as an adjective
each instance of a word whose majority tag was as an adjective. 
Following usual practice, we eliminated all words that occurred fewer
than 1 time per million words (i.e., had counts less than 5).  We then
hand-checked the remaining 1250 adjectives, eliminating remaining
tagging errors.  The result was 1065 hand-curated adjectives.

We also investigated some useful subsets of these 1065 adjectives. 164
*sensory adjectives* *(chunky, crispy, crunchy, doughy, fluffy, rich,
smoky, tangy, zesty)* were selected by hand-coding the 1065, and checked
to include all adjectives in Zwicky and Zwicky. 176 *participial*
adjectives were all those among the 1065 that had participial morphology
(*grilled, mixed, sliced, steamed, baked, smoked*). We also included two
classes of positive sentiment adjectives, both drawn by extending the
*extreme positive emotion* list that was carefully constructed by
Larcker and Zakolyukina. [^21] 55 *extreme positive sentiment* words
were chosen by taking the 36 adjectives on their *extreme positive
emotion* list that occurred more than 5 times in our corpus (more than 1
part per million) and that were not specifically food descriptive, and
adding the 19 more adjectives that were synonyms of these.   14
*delicious* words were taken by separating the 4 food descriptive words
(*delicious, delectable, scrumptious, luscious*) and adding synonyms
(*tasty, gourmet, savory, mouthwatering,* etc*.*). [^22]

**Control factors**: We added three control factors: the log of the
total number of words describing all the dishes on the menu (used as an
additional control for factors like the number of dishes), the city in
which the restaurant was located, and the restaurant category, which
consisted of a label from a set of 32 types of restaurants.  These were
constructed by grouping the 85 relevant Yelp restaurant types into the
following 32 categories, based on choosing restaurants with similar
cuisines and similar price ranges:

Pizza, Chinese, Italian, Steakhouses, American (new), Japanese, Mexican,
French, American (traditional), Sandwiches, Cafes, Fast food, Thai,
Indian, Other Asian, Diners, Seafood, Middle Eastern, Latin American,
Bars, Bakeries, Spanish, Korean, Mediterranean, Barbeque, Other
European, Vegetarian, Ethiopian, Soul food, Southern and Cajun, Greek,
Asian fusion

Each restaurant was assigned to exactly one of these 32 categories;
restaurants listed in Yelp with multiple classes were assigned to
whichever of those classes occurred most frequently in the entire
dataset.

 

### **Experiment** {#experiment style="text-align: center;"}

We used a simple linear regression to test the relationship between
variables and restaurant price status.  The dependent variable is the
number of dollar signs.

Our main independent variables are based on counts of words (a "bag of
words" model since we ignore word order and other cues to grammatical
structures).  Word counts typically have a very long-tailed distribution
so we apply the standard transformations to achieve a more Gaussian
distribution. Thus each feature of a word count *c* was included as *log
(1+c),* and length variables (length of dish product descriptions in
words, and length of words in letters) were included as the log of the
length (in letters or words).

Because all word count features drawn from a particular product
description were collinear with the length of the product description
(the more words in the description, the more chances for each type of
word to appear), we next used a linear regression to remove effects of
log length from each lexicon variable.  We then included the residuals
from this regression (rather than the raw counts) as variables to
represent the effects of each lexicon of interest.

Linear regression was then used to predict the restaurant price (an
integer from 1-4, representing \$, \$\$, \$\$\$, \$\$\$\$) from the
variables of interest and the set of control variables, via the lm
package in R.

Because the difference between the four categories (\$, \$\$, \$\$\$,
\$\$\$\$) may not be linear, we also ran an ordinal logit using the
*polr* function in R, predicting the four categories (\$, \$\$, \$\$\$,
\$\$\$\$) as ordinal categories values from the independent variables.
The results were the same as those from the linear regression, and so in
the remainder of the paper we describe only the linear regression.

However, for the four different subtypes of adjectives considered below,
we additionally ask whether some adjective classes were particularly
associated with particular price classes (for example whether markers of
traditional authenticity were especially associated with lower-middle
priced (\$\$) restaurants). We therefore also ran multinomial logistic
regressions (using glm in R) predicting a binary variable comparing the
class of interest (in this case \$\$) against the other three classes
(\$, \$\$\$, \$\$\$\$) and report on the role of the predictor in
question as an independent variable, after controlling for all the same
variables described above (restaurant category, number of dishes, number
of words in different classes, etc.).

 

### **Results** {#results style="text-align: center;"}

We describe the results of each aspect of distinction separately; full
regressions are shown in the appendix.

Restaurant price is significantly associated with the language of
natural authenticity (*p* \< 2 x 10^-16^); expensive restaurants have
descriptions like \"Local Albacore Tuna Nicoise: *summer* beans,
*heirloom* tomatoes, yellow tomato aioli, soft boiled *farm* egg\" or
\"Bison Burger: 8 oz. Blue Star *Farms*, *grass fed* & *pasture
raised\".*

Traditional authenticity is associated instead with cheaper restaurants
(*p* = .000716), especially lower-middle-priced (\$\$) restaurants which
offer dishes like "Homemade Tiramisu: family recipe", "Old Fashioned
Beef Stew", or "Annie's Famous Pot Roast: Homemade, just like Mom's."
Figure 1 shows the raw counts and confidence intervals.

To test the hypothesis (suggested from Figure 1) that it was
lower-middle priced (\$\$) restaurants that make extra use of
traditional authenticity, we also ran a logistic regression predicting
class (\$\$ versus \$, \$\$\$, \$\$\$\$) after controlling for
restaurant category, number of dishes, and number of words.  The framing
of traditional authenticity indeed was more likely to be used in the
menus of lower middle priced restaurants (*p* = 0.000303).

::: {#attachment_659 .image style="width: 660px"}
![](figure1_authenticity.jpg)

Figure 1. Means and 95% confidence intervals for raw values of natural
versus traditional authenticity by restaurant price status. The values
are counts per average dish description. Thus for example on \$\$\$
menus, mentions of natural authenticity occurred on average 6 times in
every 100 dish descriptions.
:::

Educational capital was also associated with restaurant status. More
expensive restaurants were indeed more likely  (*p *\< 2 x 10^-16^) to
use longer words like *accompaniments, complements, magnificent,
inspiration, exquisitely*; cheaper restaurants used shorter forms like
*sides* instead of *accompaniments* or *complements*. Figure 2 shows raw
means and standard errors:

::: {#attachment_660 .image style="width: 660px"}
![](figure2_wordlength.jpg)

Figure 2. Means and 95% confidence intervals for raw values of word
length in letters by restaurant price status.
:::

To see the association of foreign words with expensive restaurants, we
examined the words most likely to occur in the \$\$\$\$ class, which we
defined as those words with the highest log likelihood ratio between the
counts in the \$\$\$\$ class and the summed counts in the other three
classes, using the "weighted log-odds-ratio, informative Dirichlet
prior" method. [^23] We found that 28 of the 100 words most associated
with the expensive restaurants were foreign, including 9 French words
(*les, de, le, fois, gras, crème, mousse, tarte, pommes*), 6 Italian
words (*e, con, risotto, pancetta, burrata, polenta, parmigiano*), and
13 Japanese words *(tempura, uni, wagyu, sushi, yuzu, sashimi, miso,
shabu, kobe, ponzu, wasabi, ninja, and sake*). The fact that the French
and Italian vocabularies are full of function words (the short
grammatical words like *de* or *con*) suggests that at least some of
these product descriptions are written largely or even entirely in
French or Italian. In summary, more expensive restaurants had longer
words and more high-status foreign words.

As expected cheaper restaurants have more dishes on the menu (*p *\< 5.7
x 10^-15^) and are more likely to use the framing of choice and plenty.
They emphasized generous portion sizes, making use of words like
*generous*, *hearty*, and *big* (*p* = .0023) (\"Baked Meat Lasagna:
Made with our *hearty* meat sauce,\" \"Tuna Supreme: A *generous* scoop
of tuna"). Cheaper restaurants are more likely to emphasize the extent
of diner's choice with descriptions like "baby lamb chops, grilled *to
your liking\",* \"PEI mussels: *choose your style\"*) (*p *\< 2 x
10^-16^).

::: {#attachment_662 .image style="width: 660px"}
![](figure3_choice.jpg)

Figure 3. Means and 95% confidence intervals for raw values of choice
and plenty by restaurant price status. 3b shows values of plenty for all
restaurants; note the very large variance for the \$\$\$\$ restaurants;
3c shows values for the restaurants after removing all steakhouses.
:::

Figure 3 shows raw means and variances. Note from Figure 3b that while
plenty was significantly associated with cheaper restaurants, there is
still enormous variance in the most expensive \$\$\$\$ class. We
examined the uses of plenty framing in \$\$\$\$ restaurants and found
that most of these were steakhouses; here's a sample usage from a
Chicago steakhouse:

> Big Shoulders: and you thought our petite porterhouse was big! this is
> a full forty ounces! that's eight ounces short of three pounds! are
> you up to the challenge?

Figure 3c shows the vastly reduced variance in a smaller version of the
dataset that removed the 81 steakhouses.  To further investigate this
suggestion of an association between steakhouses and plenty, we also ran
a linear regression predicting the log number of mentions of words
suggesting plenty from the restaurant category.  Seven classes of
restaurants were more likely to use these framings: steakhouses (*p* =
2.30 x 10^-7^), traditional American food (*p* = 4.17 x 10^-9^), fast
food (*p* \< 2 x 10^-16^), sandwiches (*p* = 6.28 x 10^-11^), bars (*p*
= 0.00048), pizza (*p* = 0.0044) and barbecue (*p *= 0.00019).  Our
findings thus confirm the association of plenty and choice with cheaper
restaurants; we return in the discussion section to the implications of
the association of plenty with steakhouses and other types.

Finally, we examined the role of adjectives. Conforming to our
hypothesis, adjectives in general were negatively associated with price;
cheaper restaurants used more adjectives than expensive ones (*p *\< 6.1
x 10^-5^).  Figure 4 shows the raw means and variances for the four
specific sub-classes of adjectives we consider.

::: {#attachment_665 .image style="width: 660px"}
![](figure4_adjs.jpg)

Figure 4. Means and 95% confidence intervals for raw values of four
classes of adjectives by restaurant price status. Sensory adjectives and
participles are more associated with middle-priced restaurants, while
adjectives of positive sentiment (either related to food or not) are
associated with the cheapest restaurants.
:::

As Figure 4 suggests, while adjectival protestations of quality are used
less on expensive restaurants, different classes of adjectives are
associated with different groups of cheaper restaurants. Sensory
adjectives are strongly associated with lower-middle-priced restaurants
(*p* = 0.000182) in a logistic regression comparing \$\$ with
\$,\$\$\$,\$\$\$\$ after controlling for category, number of dishes,
length and the other adjectives). We see examples like \"*Crisp Golden
Brown* Belgian waffle with *Fresh* Fruit\"). Participles are similarly
associated with lower-middle-priced  (\$\$) restaurants (same
regression, *p *= 1.66 x 10^-8^). Both positive sentimental adjectives
(*excellent, great, wonderful*, *p *= 9.09 x 10^-8^) and positive food
adjectives (*delicious, tasty, gourmet*, *p *= 1.76 x 10^-7^) are
associated with lowest priced (\$) restaurants in a logistic regression
comparing \$ with \$\$,\$\$\$,\$\$\$\$ after controlling for category,
number of dishes, length and the other adjectives.

 

### **Studying menus over time** {#studying-menus-over-time style="text-align: center;"}

Our study suggests a number of ways that modern menus reflect Bourdieu's
ideas of distinction. But it is important to understand to what extent
these factors are long-lasting trends that describe attitudes toward
food culture in the United States, and to what extent they solely
characterize recent food culture in 2011, the date the menus were
collected.  The fact that Bourdieu's own analyses date from data he
collected in the 1960s, half a century ago in France suggests that these
trends have persisted for a while. Have cheaper restaurants always
emphasized traditional authenticity, and expensive ones natural
authenticity?

To answer this question we turn to a second dataset: the New York Public
Library's Buttolph Collection, which contains over 17,000 digitized and
transcribed menus from 1852-2015. [^24]  The menus come from a wide
variety of locales, but the majority of those whose source is labeled
come from New York City restaurants or from steamships. The collection
is strongest around the turn of the last century, so we extracted all
menus from 1892-1921. Because the dataset has enormous variation across
time and space and the metadata is often lacking, our analysis here is
necessarily preliminary, leaving for future investigation many questions
like establishing the correct control variables (restaurant category,
exact location) or of designing a proper sample. Nevertheless, we chose
to do a preliminary analysis, controlling for at least some variables. 
For example because the dataset contains enormous numbers of duplicate
menus from the same restaurant on different days (210 menus in the year
1914 alone come just from different lunches and dinners at the Waldorf
Astoria Hotel), we eliminated all cases of identical dishes from the
same restaurant in the same year, resulting in 2858 distinct menus for
this period. We defined a simplified 2-point pricing scale (cheap versus
expensive), first using the median price of the dishes on a menu to
assign a cost score to each menu, then computing an annual median of the
menu costs for each year in the data, and labeling a menu in a given
year "expensive" if its cost score was above the median for that year,
and "cheap" otherwise.

We then asked which of the aspects of distinction discussed above
characterized menus from a century ago. Multinomial logistic regression
was used, with the price of a menu (cheap versus expensive) as the
dependent variable, and each of the textual indicators of distinction
discussed above as independent variables. Only five variables were
significantly associated with price. More expensive menus had longer
words (*p *\< 2 x 10^-16^), and cheaper menus displayed more linguistic
signs of traditional authenticity (*p* = 3.45 x 10^-7^) and choice
(*p *= 1.02 x 10^-6^), and used more adjectives (*p *= 1.07 x 10^-9^).
One control variable was also significant: cheaper menus used more words
overall (*p *= 0.000474). None of the other variables were significantly
different between the cheap and expensive restaurants (although there
were large differences in the presence of French vocabulary, which we
return to below). Figure 6 shows the raw means and variances for these
variables.

::: {#attachment_538 .image style="width: 660px"}
![](figure5_nypl.jpg)

Figure 5. Means and 95% confidence intervals for raw values of four
variables in historical menus from 1892-1921 from the New York Public
Library Buttolph Collection. These four variables all pattern exactly as
on modern menus. Other variables signaling distinction (number of items,
plenty, sensory adjectives, natural authenticity, sentiment adjectives,
delicious words) show no interaction with restaurant price in these
menus.
:::

Early examples of traditional authenticity on inexpensive menus look
very much like modern menu items, with examples like "homemade sausage
with hot slaw" from the 1899 menu of the Hotel Baltimore, or "old
fashioned corn bread with maple syrup" from the 1900 menu of Mandel's
Tea Rooms.  Customer choice also appears on cheaper menus in the
previous century, such as Haan's advertising "terrapin any style" in
1900 (turtle was very popular at that time), Hazeltine's 1914 "toasted
bread any kind", or the 1913 menu of Smith's Restaurant which allows the
customer to "choose one dish from each column."

The results of our investigation of menus from a century ago, while
certainly preliminary, suggests that at least some of the aspects of
Bourdieu's distinction have been visible on restaurant menus for well
over a century.  The fact that lower-priced restaurants emphasized
traditional authenticity suggests that the framing of inexpensive food
as old-fashioned or homey has itself a long history in the US.  The fact
that expensive restaurants use longer words points to the early role of
educational capital in marking status.

We did not find evidence that expensive restaurants were more likely to
mention farms or pastures. Restaurants of that period certainly did
mention farms or the way the food was raised ("Deerfoot Farm sausages",
"buttermilk from Darling Farm", "special raised turkey"), but these were
not more likely to be expensive restaurants.  What words were then most
likely to occur in the most expensive restaurants? We examined the words
with the highest log likelihood ratio between the counts in the
restaurants in the top quartile of priced class and the summed counts
for all other restaurant price classes, again using the "weighted
log-odds-ratio, informative Dirichlet prior" method of Monroe, Colaresi
and Quinn (2008). Of the 20 words ranked as most characteristic of the
most expensive restaurants, 14 were French words (*creme, salade, de,
la, a, au*, etc.). The remainder were mainly expensive products
(*lobster*, *squab*, *champagne*, and, perhaps surprisingly to the
modern reader, *chicken*).  The high prevalence of French words on
expensive menus reflects the well-known role of French language and
cuisine as a signifier of high status in American cuisine of the 19th
and 20th centuries.

The fact that the expensive restaurants also use fewer words and fewer
adjectives suggests that the use of implicit or "modest advertising" to
mark high status dates back at least 100 years. Individual words,
however, have changed their association with status over time, in the
kind of trickle-down of status suggested by Veblen and Simmel. [^25] In
the historical corpus, for example, *gourmet* is associated with more
expensive restaurants, like the "braised lamb gourmet" from the 1917
Waldorf Astoria or the "tomato gourmet salad" from the 1920 Hotel
Manhattan. In modern menus, however the word *gourmet* is associated
only with cheaper restaurants, and you can order a "gourmet large
pepperoni" from any number of pizza delivery restaurants in the 2011
dataset. While in many uses *gourmet* surely retains some of its earlier
sense of epicurean expertise,  on menus the word has undergone semantic
bleaching, leaving it mainly as a vague protestation of quality.

 

### **Discussion** {#discussion style="text-align: center;"}

We investigated a large dataset of restaurant menus coded with textual,
quantitative, and metadata information to understand how words on menus
subtly reflect aspects of our food culture. Our results suggest that the
words used in menu descriptions of American restaurants reflect the many
aspects of Bourdieu's *distinction*.  Expensive restaurants use the
language of natural authenticity, focusing on the provenance of their
food, while cheaper restaurants focus on traditional authenticity,
highlighting old-fashioned American dishes and moms and grandmas.  The
link between the natural and pastoral with expensive menus is also
consistent with a wide variety of previous research, and is presumably
linked with the huge changes in American food that occurred in the 1960s
and 1970s. [^26] Researchers have noted a contemporaneous increase in
emphasis on the pastoral in the related field of wine reviewing, and
suggested that the association of the pastoral genre with the urban
upper class could also be at least in part a response to the increasing
role of technology and related conflicts of modernity. [^27]

The use of these two metaphors for authenticity acts as a way of
targeting consumers, using values that appeal differently to the two
groups; food origin and purity for higher socio-economic status
consumers, and family and tradition for lower socio-economic status
consumers. [^28] Our work shows that authenticity is not a monolithic
concept: it can be used to mean different things to different consumers,
and that firms use these different kinds of authenticity in a coherent
way for product differentiation.  Furthermore, at least one aspect of
this framing, the association of tradition with cheaper restaurants,
dates back well over a century.

Modern expensive restaurants are more likely to use longer words and to
use foreign words from three high-status foreign languages: French,
Italian, and Japanese. How do complex and foreign words acquire their
linguistic association with high status? French of course has long been
associated with high status in cuisine; Italian and Japanese are more
recent high-status culinary languages.  The use of more complex words is
a sign of educational capital, which has long been associated with high
status. Complex words are also associated with more formal genres [^29]
and more formal or ceremonial language is also associated with high
status or luxury.  It's possible as well that these complex words are an
attempt to appeal to the reader's ego; a reader who can understand these
complex or foreign words is implicit being flattered at their ability to
understand the "code".  Presumably, a more complex menu also requires
more educated or trained wait staff to discuss the menu with customers.
This association of complex words, and especially French words, with
high status was visible also in menus from a century earlier.

Cheaper restaurants focus on *plenty* by emphasizing the size of
portions (*generous, Texas-sized*) and the amount of choices they offer
in number of dishes and options within those dishes. This framing is
most associated with steakhouses, traditional American food, fast food,
pizza, sandwiches, barbecue, and bars.  Except for steakhouses, these
are not fancy restaurants, but everyday places that seem to cater to the
eater more concerned with value. Furthermore, these are all restaurants
that serve American food, focusing on American ethnic foods (sandwiches,
hamburgers, and barbecue); thus Chinese restaurants, while prevalent in
the cheap (\$) categories, do not seem to make use of the metaphor of
plenty. Steakhouses are the exception to the generally low prices of
restaurants using this metaphor. Although expensive in price,
steakhouses seem to draw on this same framing of the all-American
working class, suggesting we should expect to see other aspects of
working class framing in steakhouses. The fact that only part of this
framing of plenty (the emphasis on choice, but not the emphasis on large
portions) was present a century earlier suggests a change in this aspect
of distinction.

Finally, expensive restaurants generally use more implicit language,
using fewer of the many kinds of adjectives used by cheaper restaurants,
and this use of fewer words and adjectives was also present in menus a
hundred years ago.  H. Paul Grice's model of cooperative language
behavior may explain how the avoidance of such modifiers sends a signal
about quality. Grice proposed that language users automatically obey
certain communicative maxims. [^30] A rational communicator of the type
described by Grice would only mention that food is *crisp* or *fresh* to
fulfill a communicative goal like convincing the reader, which only
makes sense if the reader doesn't already think the food is crisp and
fresh. A high status restaurant, however, wants freshness and crispness
to be already presumed, and therefore the crispness should go
unmentioned. No expensive restaurant would use a description like this
one from a cheap restaurant: \"a *flavorful,* *colorful,* and
*delicious* salad mixture of *crispy* bacon bits\". For an expensive
restaurant that the food is flavorful and delicious should go without
saying.

To see these Gricean inferences in a qualitative way, we examined the
foods most commonly associated with one of these adjectives, "real".
  Exactly which foods a menu claim to be "real" depends on the price.
The least expensive (\$) restaurants are most likely to promise "real
whipped cream", "real mashed potatoes", and "real bacon".  In slightly
more expensive (\$\$) restaurants, "real" is used mainly to describe
"real crab" and "real maple syrup". By contrast, "real" is barely used
at all for more expensive (\$\$\$ and \$\$\$\$) restaurants. For a pricy
restaurant to call its crab "real" would be to suggest that its realness
might be in question and has to be defended.

The avoidance of over-explicit adjectives by high status restaurant is
also consonant with the game-theoretic models described above, [^31] and
with consumer studies that find that consumers perceive excessive ads as
overcompensating for problems in a low-quality product. [^32] The visual
counterpart of minimal language is the use of white space in spare ads,
which both consumers and creative directors associated with prestige and
quality, based on a link between white space and the mid-century
minimalist movement in art and the "less is more" movement in
architecture, all of which associated spare, clean, minimal designs with
prestige and the upper class in North America. [^33] Finally, this use
of overly explicit descriptions by less expensive restaurants might also
be modeled as a kind of overcompensation, in which a group that is
anxious about its status overcompensates in the cues for that status;
this kind of overcompensation is common both in linguistics, in the
hypercorrection seen in speakers of non-standard styles, [^34] or the
overcompensation seen in other social categories like masculinity. [^35]

While our results are generally consistent with prior literature, there
are some differences.  Our finding that inexpensive restaurants are more
likely to emphasize consumer choice as compared with expensive
restaurants seems inconsistent with work finding that European-Americans
of higher socio-economic status (SES) emphasize personal choice more
than those of lower SES. [^36] It is possible that choice is simply more
implicit in high-SES restaurants, which may be more willing to make
special versions of dishes (for example omitting particular
ingredients), have waiters discuss choices orally, or put choices on a
chalkboard without highlighting this fact on the written menu.
Investigating this paradox is an important direction for future
research.

Our study has a number of limitations, such as its focus solely on major
metropolitan areas and its focus on firms solely in the United States.
Strauss's (2005) comparative study of the language of television
advertising shows that generic terms like *oishii* or *umai*
('delicious' or 'tasty') are very common in Japanese advertising, but
generic terms like 'delicious' are less common in American or Korean
advertising, which are instead more likely to discuss specific positive
qualities that cause the food to be delicious. Thus the finding that
vague positive words like *delicious* or *tasty* are associated with
lower priced restaurants or dishes is likely specific to marketing in
the United States context. Further cross-cultural research is clearly
called for. Understanding the role of the socio-economic status of the
consumer, and also how these restaurant meals fit into larger patterns
of food purchase and consumption, also remain important directions.

Despite these caveats, our results highlight the important role that
investigating the "linguistics of the everyday" should play for our
understanding of culture. Quotidian aspects of life are useful windows
onto culture, not just because our attitudes toward daily life reflect
our implicit beliefs about identity and socio-economic class, but also
because they may come pre-annotated with economic variables, as does the
language of restaurant menus or food reviews. Computational techniques
can thus be key in helping explore aspects of culture and society.

 

### **Appendix** {#appendix style="text-align: center;"}

  Category                 \#    \%           Category         \#     \%
  ------------------------ ----- -------- --- ---------------- ------ -------
  Pizza                    730   11.20%       Middle Eastern   121    1.90%
  Chinese                  615   9.40%        Diners           105    1.60%
  Italian                  592   9.10%        Seafood          96     1.50%
  American (new)           494   7.60%        Steakhouses      81     1.20%
  American (traditional)   473   7.30%        Mediterranean    59     0.90%
  Japanese                 462   7.10%        Spanish          54     0.80%
  Mexican                  397   6.10%        Korean           52     0.80%
  Bars                     276   4.20%        Bakeries         52     0.80%
  Sandwiches               226   3.50%        Asian fusion     46     0.70%
  Thai                     220   3.40%        Barbeque         36     0.60%
  Other                    200   3.10%        Other European   34     0.50%
  Fast food                199   3.10%        Vegetarian       32     0.50%
  French                   197   3.00%        Ethiopian        21     0.30%
  Indian                   178   2.70%        Greek            17     0.30%
  Latin American           165   2.50%        Southern         13     0.20%
  Coffee & Tea             132   2.00%        Soul food        13     0.20%
  Other Asian              123   1.90%                                
                                              Total            6511   

Table A1. Broad restaurant categories for all restaurants in the
dataset. Categories were created by hand-grouping Yelp categories by
cuisine and price similarity.

                                    Estimate    StdError   z\_value   Pr(\>\|z\|)    
  --------------------------------- ----------- ---------- ---------- ------------- --------
  (Intercept)                       -2.856242   0.329042   -8.68      \<2e-16       \*\*\*
  citychicago                       -0.043169   0.033967   -1.271     0.203809      
  cityla                            0.061897    0.042524   1.456      0.145562      
  citynyc                           0.166924    0.02487    6.712      2.08E-11      \*\*\*
  cityphiladelphia                  0.018239    0.031218   0.584      0.559081      
  citysf                            -0.047399   0.027739   -1.709     0.087544      .
  citywashington                    0.102401    0.033002   3.103      0.001925      \*\*
  categoryamerican\_(traditional)   -0.226379   0.036237   -6.247     4.44E-10      \*\*\*
  categoryasian\_fusion             0.155454    0.084581   1.838      0.066119      .
  categorybakeries                  -0.53602    0.080458   -6.662     2.92E-11      \*\*\*
  categorybarbeque                  0.122788    0.095623   1.284      0.199156      
  categorybars                      -0.210265   0.041823   -5.028     5.10E-07      \*\*\*
  categorychinese                   -0.266647   0.040417   -6.597     4.52E-11      \*\*\*
  categorycoffee\_&\_tea            -0.573856   0.054413   -10.546    \<2e-16       \*\*\*
  categorydiners                    -0.290413   0.061352   -4.734     2.25E-06      \*\*\*
  categoryethiopian                 -0.143439   0.122629   -1.17      0.242165      
  categoryfast\_food                -0.549233   0.047937   -11.457    \<2e-16       \*\*\*
  categoryfrench                    0.331963    0.046377   7.158      9.10E-13      \*\*\*
  categorygreek                     -0.287144   0.134892   -2.129     0.033317      \*
  categoryindian                    -0.319241   0.049826   -6.407     1.59E-10      \*\*\*
  categoryitalian                   0.003328    0.034616   0.096      0.923404      
  categorykorean                    -0.070347   0.081356   -0.865     0.387249      
  categorylatin\_american           -0.332607   0.050576   -6.576     5.20E-11      \*\*\*
  categorymediterranean             -0.333472   0.075645   -4.408     1.06E-05      \*\*\*
  categorymexican                   -0.489798   0.038614   -12.684    \<2e-16       \*\*\*
  categorymiddle\_eastern           -0.426998   0.056383   -7.573     4.15E-14      \*\*\*
  categoryother                     -0.203001   0.046395   -4.375     1.23E-05      \*\*\*
  categoryotherasian                -0.372029   0.057198   -6.504     8.40E-11      \*\*\*
  categoryothereuropean             -0.289007   0.097082   -2.977     0.002922      \*\*
  categorypizza                     -0.64579    0.034175   -18.897    \<2e-16       \*\*\*
  categorysandwiches                -0.85918    0.044656   -19.24     \<2e-16       \*\*\*
  categoryseafood                   0.301452    0.061283   4.919      8.91E-07      \*\*\*
  categorysoul\_food                -0.036079   0.154407   -0.234     0.815257      
  categorysouthern                  -0.1077     0.153362   -0.702     0.482544      
  categoryspanish                   0.110111    0.078953   1.395      0.163175      
  categorysteakhouses               0.928564    0.065865   14.098     \<2e-16       \*\*\*
  categorysushi\_bars               0.205773    0.038764   5.308      1.14E-07      \*\*\*
  categorythai                      -0.193253   0.04799    -4.027     5.71E-05      \*\*\*
  categoryvegetarian                -0.198101   0.099919   -1.983     0.047453      \*
  logwordlen                        2.314061    0.160053   14.458     \<2e-16       \*\*\*
  loglength                         0.274683    0.016534   16.613     \<2e-16       \*\*\*
  lognumitems                       -0.082184   0.010498   -7.828     5.74E-15      \*\*\*
  adjectives                        -0.228804   0.052673   -4.344     1.42E-05      \*\*\*
  plenty                            -0.931954   0.305653   -3.049     0.002305      \*\*
  consumer choice                   -0.595383   0.06144    -9.691     \<2e-16       \*\*\*
  natural authenticity              2.308947    0.159477   14.478     \<2e-16       \*\*\*
  traditional authenticity          -0.45395    0.134103   -3.385     0.000716      \*\*\*

Table A2.  Coefficients for the linear regression predicting restaurant
price status (an integer 1-4 corresponding to \$, \$\$, \$\$\$,
\$\$\$\$) from control variables and variables of interest, using the lm
package in R. The adjusted R-squared was 0.4458. All variables from the
count lexicons (adjectives, plenty, etc.) are residuals after regressing
out the effects of description length in words (loglength).

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Sensory Adjectives/Adverbs: airy, aromatic, astringent, beefy, bitter, bittersweet, blazing, bloomy, bold, bright, briny, brisk, burnt, buttery, cheesiest, cheesy, chewy, chocolaty, chunky, citrusy, clean, coarse, cold, colorful, complex, cool, creamy, crisp, crispier, crisply, crispy, crumbly, crunchy, crusty, dark, darkest, delicate, dense, doughy, drier, dry, earthy, effervescent, explosive, faint, fatty, feathery, fiery, finely, fizzy, flaky, flowery, fluffy, foamy, fragrant, fresh, freshest, freshly, frosty, frothy, fruity, fudgy, funky, fuzzy, garlicky, gentle, glassy, golden, gooey, grainy, grassy, gummy, herbaceous, herbal, hot, hottest, icy, juicy, leafy, lemony, light, lighter, lightest, luscious, lush, luxurious, malty, meatiest, meaty, meltingly, mild, mildly, milky, minty, moist, numbing, nutty, oaky, peachy, peppery, perfumed, pink, piquant, plump, porky, puffy, rich, richer, richest, richly, ripe, robust, salty, saucy, sharp, sharper, sharply, shiny, silken, silky, slender, smoky, smooth, smoother, soft, soupy, sour, spicer, spicey, spicier, spicy, spongy, spreadable, stinky, strong, stronger, succulent, sultry, supple, sweet, sweetest, syrupy, tangy, tawny, tender, tenderly, thinly, toasty, velvety, verdant, vibrant, vinegary, warm, warmer, wet, winy, zesty
  Positive Sentiment: amazing, appealing, awesome, beautiful, best, better, dazzling, delightful, divine, dynamite, excellent, exceptional, exciting, extraordinary, fabulous, famous, fancy, fantastic, favorite, fine, finest, gorgeous, great, greater, greatest, greatest, heavenly, incredible, incredible, incredibly, irresistible, lavish, legendary, lovely, magical, magnificent, marvelous, outrageous, outstanding, perfect, popular, sensational, spectacular, splendid, striking, stunning, sublime, superb, terrific, unforgettable, unique, wonderful
  Positive Food Sentiment: appetizing, delectable, delicious, flavorful, gourmet, luscious, mouthwatering, savory, scrumptious, tastiest, tasty, toothsome, yummy
  Plenty: big, bigger, biggest, bottomless, bountiful, colossal, endless, enormous, generous, generously, gigantic, ginormous, heaped, heaping, hearty, hefty, huge, largest, loaded, loads, lots, mammoth, massive, mega, oversized, overstuffed, piled, plentiful, plenty, refills, unlimited, and more, king sized, texas sized, thick cut, tons of, with more
  Choice: choice, choose, any, add, or, specify, substitutions, specifications, options, pick, your way, your own, your liking, your style, your favorite, you like, you want, you request, way you, you may, select your, select from, you select, select one, select any, select or, select a, select up, select two
  Traditional Authenticity: home\*, traditional\*, timeless, family recipe, all american, our founder, old fashioned, old school, american favorite, america's favorite, all time favorite, old favorite
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table A3.  Lexicons
:::
:::

[^1]: This work was supported in part by a research grant from Google,
    and by the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences at
    Stanford University. We are grateful for very helpful suggestions
    from David Bamman, Mark Liberman, and the anonymous reviewers, and
    to the New York Public Library for their generosity in making the
    Buttolph menu collection available to the public.

[^2]: Pierre Bourdieu, *Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement
    of Taste*, trans. Richard Nice (Harvard University Press, 1984).

[^3]: Glenn R Carroll and Dennis Ray Wheaton. "The organizational
    construction of authenticity: An examination of contemporary food
    and dining in the U.S," Research in Organizational Behavior 29
    (2009): 255-282.

[^4]: Michael B. Beverland, "Crafting brand authenticity: The case of
    luxury wines," *Journal of Management Studies*, 42, no. 5
    (2005):1003-1029.  Michael B. Beverland, "The 'real thing': Branding
    authenticity in the luxury wine trade," *Journal of Business
    Research* 59, no. 2 (2006): 251-258.  Michael B. Beverland, Adam
    Lindgreen, and Michiel W. Vink, "Projecting Authenticity Through
    Advertising: Consumer judgments of advertisers' claims," *Journal of
    Advertising* 37, no. 1 (2008): 5-15.

[^5]: Josée Johnston and Shyon Baumann, "Democracy versus Distinction: A
    Study of Omnivorousness in Gourmet Food Writing," *American Journal
    of Sociology* 113, no. 1 (2007): 165-204.

[^6]: Robin Lakoff, "Identity a la Carte; or, You Are What You Eat," In
    *Discourse and identity (Studies in interactional
    sociolinguistics),* ed. Anna De Fina, Deborah Schiffrin, Michael
    Bamberg (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006), 147-165.

[^7]: Our labs: Joshua Freedman and Dan Jurafsky, "Authenticity in
    America: Class distinctions in potato chip advertising,"
    *Gastronomica: The Journal of Critical Food Studies* 11, no. 4
    (2011): 46-54; Victor Chahuneau, Kevin Gimpel, Bryan R. Routledge,
    Lily Scherlis, and Noah A. Smith, "Word salad: Relating food prices
    and descriptions," In *Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on
    Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational
    Natural Language Learning*, (Association for Computational
    Linguistics: 2012), 1357-1367. Re: working class identity see
    Douglas B. Holt, "Does cultural capital structure American
    consumption?" *Journal of Consumer Research* 25, no. 1 (1998):
    1-25;  Marjorie DeVault, *Feeding the Family: The Social
    Organization of Caring as* *Gendered Work* (University of Chicago
    Press, 1994); Bourdieu 1984; Joan C. Williams, *Reshaping the
    Work-Family Debate: Why Men and Class Matter* (Harvard University
    Press, 2010); Alana Conner Snibbe and Hazel Rose Markus, "You can't
    always get what you want: educational attainment, agency, and
    choice," *Journal of personality and social psychology* 88, no. 4
    (2005): 703-720; Nicole M. Stephens, Stephanie A. Fryberg, and Hazel
    Rose Markus, "When Choice Does Not Equal Freedom: A Sociocultural
    Analysis of Agency in Working-Class American Contexts," *Social
    Psychological and Personality Science* 2, no. 1 (2011): 33-41.

[^8]: David Ogilvy, *Confessions of an Advertising Man*;  Michael
    Silverstein, "Indexical order and the dialectics of sociolinguistic
    life," *Language and Communication* 23 (2003): 193-229; Lakoff
    "Identity a la Carte"; Freedman and Jurafsky "Authenticity in
    America".

[^9]: Silverstein "Indexical order and the dialectics of sociolinguistic
    life"

[^10]: Bourdieu *Distinction*, 194.

[^11]: Lakoff, "Identity a la Carte".

[^12]: Cecilia L. Ridgeway and Susan R. Fisk, "Class rules, status
    dynamics, and 'gateway' interactions," In *Facing Social Class: How
    Societal Rank Influences Interaction*, ed. Susan T. Fiske and Hazel
    Rose Markus (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2012.), 249.

[^13]: Mark Liberman, "Modification as social anxiety," *Language Log*
    (May 16, 2004).

[^14]: Nick Feltovich, Rick Harbaugh and Ted To, "Too cool for school?
    Signalling and countersignalling," RAND Journal of Economics 33, no.
    4, (2002): 630-649; Ram Orzach, Per Baltzer Overgaard and Yair
    Tauman, "Modest advertising signals strength," RAND Journal of
    Economics 33, no. 2 (2002): 340-358.

[^15]: Ann Zwicky and Arnold Zwicky, "America's National Dish: The Style
    of Restaurant Menus," American Speech 55, no. 83 (1980): 87-92;
    Brian Wansink, Koert van Ittersum, and James E. Painter, "How
    Descriptive Food Names Bias Sensory Perceptions in Restaurants;"
    Food Quality and Preference 16, no. 5 (2005): 393-400; Brian
    Wansink, James M. Painter, and Koert Van Ittersum, "Descriptive menu
    labels' effect on sales," Cornell Hotel and Restaurant
    Administrative Quarterly, 42 (2001), 68-72.

[^16]: Middle priced restaurants in our dataset include chains (Ruby
    Tuesday's, T.G.I. Friday's, Cheesecake Factory, California Pizza
    Kitchen, Pasta Pomodoro, Red Lobster, Legal Sea Foods, Uno Chicago
    Grill) as well as individually owned restaurants like the White Dog
    Café in Philadelphia, Pizzeria Delfina in San Francisco, or Wu Liang
    Ye in New York.

[^17]: Chahuneau et al., "Word Salad"; Freedman and Jurafsky,
    "Authenticity in America"; Sara Dickerman, "Eat Your Words: A Guide
    to Menu English," *Slate* (April 29, 2003).

[^18]: Flesch-Kincaid: Rudolph Flesch. "A new readability yardstick."
    *Journal of applied psychology* 32, no. 3 (1948): 221-233; J. Peter
    Kincaid, Robert P. Fishburne Jr, Richard L. Rogers, and Brad S.
    Chissom, *Derivation of new readability formulas (automated
    readability index, fog count and Flesch reading ease formula) for
    Navy enlisted personnel*. No. RBR-8-75. Naval Technical Training
    Command Millington TN Research Branch, 1975. Fog/smog: Robert
    Gunning,  *The Technique of Clear Writing*, McGraw-Hill, 1952; G.
    Harry McLaughlin, \"SMOG grading[---]{.emdash}a new readability
    formula,\" *Journal of Reading* 12, no. 8 (1969): 639-646.

[^19]: Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher Manning, and Yoram
    Singer, "Feature-Rich Part-of-Speech Tagging with a Cyclic
    Dependency Network," In *Proceedings of HLT-NAACL* (2003): 252-259.

[^20]: Gale, William A., Kenneth W. Church, and David Yarowsky. "One
    sense per discourse." In *Proceedings of the workshop on Speech and
    Natural Language*, Association for Computational Linguistics (1992):
    233-237; David Yarowsky, "Unsupervised word sense disambiguation
    rivaling supervised methods," In *Proceedings of ACL*, ACL (1995):
    189-196.

[^21]: David F. Larcker and Anastasia A. Zakolyukina, "Detecting
    deceptive discussions in conference calls," *Journal of Accounting
    Research* 50, no. 2 (2012): 495-540.

[^22]: We return later to these implications of the modern meaning of
    the word "gourmet".

[^23]: Burt L. Monroe, Michael P. Colaresi, and Kevin M. Quinn,
    "Fightin' words: Lexical feature selection and evaluation for
    identifying the content of political conflict," *Political
    Analysis* 16, no. 4 (2008): 372-403.

[^24]: Michael Lascarides and Ben Vershbow, "What's on the menu?
    Crowdsourcing at the New York Public Library," In *Crowdsourcing Our
    Cultural Heritage,* ed. Mia Ridge. 2014.

[^25]: Thorstein Veblen, *The Theory of the Leisure Class: An Economic
    Study of Institutions,* 1899; Georg Simmel,
    "Fashion," *International Quarterly* 10 (1904): 130-155.

[^26]: Harvey A. Levenstein, *Revolution at the table: the
    transformation of the American diet* (University of California
    Press, 2003); Michael Symons, "Grandmas to gourmets: The revolution
    of 1963," *Food, Culture & Society* 9, no. 2 (2006): 179-200.

[^27]: Sean Shesgreen, "Wet Dogs and Gushing Oranges: Winespeak for a
    New Millennium," *The Chronicle of Higher Education*.  March 7,
    2003; Freedman and Jurafsky, "Authenticity in America".

[^28]: Alana Conner Snibbe and Hazel Rose Markus, "You can't always get
    what you want: educational attainment, agency, and choice," *Journal
    of personality and social psychology* 88, no. 4 (2005): 703-720;
    Nicole M. Stephens, Stephanie A. Fryberg, and Hazel Rose Markus,
    "When Choice Does Not Equal Freedom: A Sociocultural Analysis of
    Agency in Working-Class American Contexts," *Social Psychological
    and Personality Science* 2, no. 1 (2011): 33-41.

[^29]: Douglas Biber, *Dimensions of Register Variation: A
    cross-linguistic comparison* (Cambridge University Press, 1995);
    Julian Brooke, Tong Wang, and Graeme Hirst, "Automatic acquisition
    of lexical formality," In *Proceedings of the 23rd International
    Conference on Computational Linguistics*, Association for
    Computational Linguistics (2010): 90-98.

[^30]: H.P. Grice, *Studies in the Way of Words* (Harvard University
    Press, 1989).

[^31]: Orzach and Tauman, "Modest advertising signals strength";
    Feltovich et.al., "Too cool for school?".

[^32]: Amna Kirmani, "The effect of perceived advertising costs on brand
    perceptions," *Journal of Consumer Research* 17, no. 2 (1990):
    160-171; Amna Kirmani, "Advertising repetition as a signal of
    quality: If it's advertised so much, something must be wrong,"
    *Journal of Advertising* 26, no. 3 (1997): 77-86; Pamela M. Homer,
    "Ad size as an indicator of perceived advertising costs and effort:
    The effects on memory and perceptions," *Journal of Advertising* 24,
    no. 4 (1995): 1-12.

[^33]: J. W. Pracejus, Olsen, G. D., & O'Guinn, T. C, "How nothing
    became something: white space, rhetoric, history, and meaning,"
    *Journal of Consumer Research* 33, no. 1 (2006): 82-9; John W.
    Pracejus, Thomas C. O'Guinn, and G. Douglas Olsen, "When white space
    is more than "burning money: Economic signaling meets visual
    commercial rhetoric,\" *International Journal of Research in
    Marketing* 30, no. 3 (2013): 211-218.

[^34]: William Labov, "Hypercorrection by the lower middle class as a
    factor in linguistic change," In *Sociolinguistics,* ed. William
    Bright. Mouton, 1966.

[^35]: Robb Willer, Christabel L. Rogalin, Bridget Conlon, and Michael
    T. Wojnowicz, "Overdoing gender: A test of the masculine
    overcompensation thesis," *American Journal of Sociology* 118, no. 4
    (2013): 980-1022.

[^36]: Conner Snibbe et.al., "You can't always get what you want"; and
    Stephens et al., "When Choice Does Not Equal Freedom".
