---
author: 'Elizabeth F. Evans and Matthew Wilkens'
date: '07.13.18'
shortauthor: 'Elizabeth F. Evans and Matthew Wilkens'
shorttitle: 'Nation, Ethnicity, and the Geography of British Fiction, 1880-1940'
title: 'Nation, Ethnicity, and the Geography of British Fiction, 1880-1940'
---

::: {.entry .print-only}
::: {#post-1565 .post-1565 .post .type-post .status-publish .format-standard .has-post-thumbnail .hentry .category-articles}
###### *Peer-Reviewed By: Stephen Ross *

###### *Clusters: [Race](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/01/race/), [Geography](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/01/geography/)*

###### *Article DOI: [10.22148/16.024](http://doi.org/10.22148/16.024)*

###### *Dataverse DOI: [10.7910/DVN/VW13KS](https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/VW13KS)*

###### *PDF DOI: [10.31235/osf.io/psg2z](https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/psg2z)*

###### *Journal ISSN: 2371-4549*

###### *Cite: Elizabeth F. Evans and Matthew Wilkens, "Nation, Ethnicity, and the Geography of British Fiction, 1880-1940," *Journal of Cultural Analytics. *July 13, 2018. [10.31235/osf.io/psg2z](http://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/psg2z)*

 

Among the most pressing problems in modernist literary studies are those
related to Britain's engagement with the wider world under empire and to
its own rapidly evolving urban spaces in the years before the Second
World War.[^1] In both cases, the literary-geographic
imagination[---]{.emdash}or unconscious[---]{.emdash}of the period
between 1880 and 1940 can help to shed light on how texts by British and
British-aligned writers of the era understood these issues and how they
evolved over time. At the highest level, how can we characterize the
international and domestic geographies of British writing? What roles,
if any, did cultural identity play in contemporary writers' spatial
imagination? What locations were over- or under-represented in their
work and how, if at all, does the answer change when we group writers by
national origin or by perceived ethnicity? What shifts in geographic
attention marked the transition from the late Victorian period to the
interwar era of high modernism? These questions, and others like them,
have received much recent attention, both popular and academic.[^2] In
this essay, we explore what we learn when we ask them at scale with
computational assistance.

Our goals in posing these questions are several. We seek first to assess
the applicability of two specific, widely (though not universally)
shared presumptions about the shape of British and British-aligned
literature's engagement with the physical world during the period. These
are its *internationalism*, by which we mean its interest in and use of
locations outside the United Kingdom, and its *geographic intensity*,
that is, the frequency of its reference to specific locations.
Internationalism is attached to modernist literature in particular with
such frequency that it can seem almost a truism. The early critical and
polemical work of T.S. Eliot and Ezra Pound, classic studies by I.A.
Richards and Hugh Kenner, and more recent scholarly turns to global
modernisms and world literature are all premised on the decreasing
significance in the early twentieth century of strictly national systems
of literary production and on the central incorporation of a more
cosmopolitan perspective into the era's literature.[^3] How such a shift
plays out in any given text or in the work of a single author is, of
course, complex and unpredictable; certainly there were writers who
remained steadfastly committed to their national frames. But we would be
surprised to find that, taken as a whole, the literature of the early
twentieth century was less international than that of the preceding
decades.

The matter of geographic intensity is less widely debated, but no less
interesting. Jon Hegglund has an explanatory mechanism in mind when he
writes, in his excellent *World Views*, that

> After the turn of the nineteenth century ... many authors cease to
> include maps in the front matter while at the same time maintaining,
> and often increasing, the amount of topographic detail in their
> narratives. This overload of geographical particularity had the
> effect, ironically, of denaturalizing the 'background' spaces of
> fiction.[^4]

But more attention to geographic space might also reasonably be expected
to accompany the modernist era's increased internationalism and
globalization, regardless of the specific fate of printed maps in its
literature. On the other hand, a shift toward the representation of
psychological interiority at the expense of the social world has often
been associated with leading modernists from Virginia Woolf to James
Joyce to William Faulkner. The resulting tension between outward-looking
geographic intensity and inward-facing psychology opens space for a new
quantitative intervention.

By characterizing the geographic attention of a large swath of British
fiction published between 1880 and 1940, we hope not only to address
these questions of internationalization and intensity, but also to
detect other widespread spatial phenomena in the period and to better
understand the dynamics of selected subgroups of authors and of texts in
relation to one another. We ask, for instance, to what extent the London
that took shape in more or less canonical writing of the period was
representative of the imagined London of British fiction as a whole and,
hence, to what extent canonical fiction is a reasonable proxy for period
writing generally. How did foreign writers, especially those who
identified as Black or Asian, resemble and diverge from native British
authors in their treatment of the metropole, the nation, and the globe?
Was there a distinctive form of regional fiction centered on London and,
if so, how did it differ from other writing at the time? How, moreover,
did any of these forms and groups change over the course of the sixty
years leading up to the Second World War, or during what we might call
the long modernist era?

It should be clear, then, that while we have a range of specific
questions to answer, our work is also in part exploratory and
recuperative. Our research concerning the imagined geography of foreign
writers in Britain addresses a dearth of literary scholarship regarding
writing by people of color within the nation prior to the more familiar
influx of migrants from British colonies after the Second World War and,
we hope, contributes to the ongoing recovery of this largely forgotten
body of creative work. Finally, we aim to provide both quantitative and
qualitative context for future research on the literature and culture of
the period via computational means that are novel in the area.

The sections below proceed by way of much new data, almost all of which
is tied directly to the questions posed here. Our results lead us to
three broad interventions in modernist literary studies. First, we argue
that a modernist studies that values internationalism must devote
significantly more attention to non-canonical literature. The mass run
of fiction published between 1880 and 1940 was consistently and
meaningfully more international than its better-known analogues. Writing
by non-native British writers was radically more so. If critics are
drawn to the outward turn in modernist texts, they can and should find a
larger, earlier, and perhaps more important version of the phenomenon by
looking beyond the usual suspects.

Second, we need to rethink London as it was encountered and described by
outsiders. This isn't just a matter of turning away from the famous and
the posh in favor of the neglected and the downtrodden (though there are
worse places to start). It's about explaining, for instance, why foreign
writers of color depict a more public, verdant London than their
colony-born white counterparts, while devoting less of their attention
to the East End and to notably international districts of the city.
These patterns are either anecdotal or essentially invisible to
conventional study. Computational methods make them available for
nuanced literary-historical reinterpretation.

Finally, we argue against treating the years between 1880 and 1940 in
terms that emphasize temporal discontinuity. Aspects of British fiction
did change across this span of sixty years, and many of the differences
we observe in the era's literary-geographic attention are genuinely
important. But when we work at scale, it's very difficult to locate "on
or about ..." moments of sudden change across whole ranges of texts. We
see instead situations of influence and drift or[---]{.emdash}and this
is the rub[---]{.emdash}we find true ruptures only between corpora built
around differing principles. The latter case, comparing corpora
assembled to emphasize difference, is the one that resembles most
closely the way in which modernist studies built its canons. Those
canons and the practices they embed aren't simply errors, but they are
deliberately and systematically nonrepresentative of large-scale
literary history. Modernist literary critics would do well to grapple
with that fact more directly than we often have.

 

There is long-standing interest in the literary geography of London. The
lives and works of individual writers from Arthur Conan Doyle to
Virginia Woolf, and the sites associated with particular literary and
social networks, have been plumbed for named locations and marked on
maps.[^5] Woolf herself wrote of the fashion for literary guides in her
day.[^6] Though it's often said that London can't be synthesized (Julian
Wolfreys, for example, asserts that London "resists ontology, and thus
affirms its alterity, its multiplicities, its excesses, its
heterogeneities"),[^7] the number of popular and academic studies of
London and its literature continue to grow.[^8]

While there's little consensus concerning *which* locations matter most
in London writing, it's now generally accepted that the overall
geography of fiction matters very much indeed.[^9] With the "spatial
turn" of recent decades, narrative and cultural critics have found close
relationships between the novel and its geography. Susan Stanford
Friedman and Franco Moretti, drawing in part and in different ways on
the work of Mikhail Bakhtin, have each influentially argued that setting
gives rise to distinct varieties of narrative and that some narratives
are inconceivable outside particular settings.[^10] Richard Dennis
voices a pervasive belief in current scholarship that, even if readers
may not always grasp the significance of a novel's named locations,
local geography matters because "locating characters and events
geographically helped to locate them socially and symbolically."[^11]
Individuals shape and are shaped by geography, an insight that is often
extended to explore the close relationship between conceptions of the
metropolis and conceptions of identity.[^12] Named locations can also
tell national stories; places have been "apt metaphors" for defining
Englishness.[^13]

The ways in which literary-geographic imaginations changed over time
matter, too. "\[T\]he spatial history of modernism," argues Andrew
Thacker, necessitates "an account of the precise historical fashion in
which particular spaces and places were conceptualized and
represented."[^14] The sixty years spanning the last decades of the
nineteenth century and the first four of the twentieth are generally
accepted to entail significant changes in literature's subject matter
and methods. The "critical consensus," as Eric Bulson writes, has it
that "ways of representing the city and the world changed radically
between Dickens' London and Joyce's Dublin."[^15] Hegglund's claim that,
during this period, literature increased its topographic detail and
particularity is attractive both because it affirms the importance of
literary geography and because it is amenable to computational
analysis.[^16] Below, we assess shifts in the intensity of geographical
references over time at scale and compare historical changes in
fiction's degree of attention to sites beyond national borders to
determine if, as one might expect, the rise of modernist cosmopolitanism
and the experience of a world war conducted mostly overseas produced
more internationally-focused literature.

London's status as the political and conceptual center of a vast empire
has likewise received increasing interest in recent years. Jonathan
Schneer has argued that London in 1900 was an "imperial city" not only
by virtue of its place in global trade and politics but also in its
built environment. From Nelson's column in Trafalgar Square and
Cleopatra's Needle on the Thames Embankment to the "revived classicism"
of buildings constructed around the turn of the century, the "public art
and architecture of London together reflected and reinforced an
impression, an atmosphere, celebrating \[...\] British
imperialism."[^17] Imperialism also shaped the city's population, as
British civil servants traveled to occupied lands, industry and trade
brought workers from around the world to London's Docks, and colonial
subjects came to study at its universities. Imperial London was also the
center of anti-imperial networks and activities. Elleke Boehmer, among
others, has called attention to how the city was "an important meeting
ground for Indian, Irish, African, and Caribbean freedom
movements."[^18] Pan-Africanism, "one of the major political traditions
of the twentieth century, was largely created by black people living in
Britain"[^19] and London was \"*the* focus for anti-imperialist
agitation.\"[^20] Historians have made important inroads in recovering
the experiences of African, West Indian, African-American, East Asian,
and South Asian visitors and residents in London prior to 1948, when the
first of a "wave" of migrants from the West Indies arrived in Britain on
the SS *Empire* *Windrush*, an event that still looms large in cultural
narratives about the nation's ever increasing "foreign" population.[^21]

But, while literary scholars have increasingly turned to the roles of
race, ethnicity, national origin, and imperialism in London literature
of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, there remains a
dearth of direct attention to period writing by people of color. The
imperial city of "colonial writers" is often explored through white
writers like Jean Rhys and Katherine Mansfield, who occupied an
ambivalent place in imperial Britain's racial hierarchy but whose
experiences and perspectives certainly were not representative of many
colonial subjects in London.[^22]"Black British" literature is often
taken to begin with the postwar writing of Sam Selvon and George
Lamming.[^23] Perhaps still limited by a longstanding preference for
stylistically experimental writing associated with high modernism,
modernist studies' much discussed "expansion" hasn't yet resulted in a
comprehensively reshaped canon, though one hopes that a handful of
excellent and well-received recent books will continue to have an
impact.[^24] In the most recent edition of the *Oxford Companion to
English Literature*, Bénédicte Ledent urges "it should not be forgotten
that there had been a sizeable body of texts predating the work of
pioneer figures like Samuel Selvon or George Lamming,"[^25] but he finds
space to name only two such writers, C.L.R. James and Una Marson, active
in the half century preceding them, each of whom was writing of London
in the 1930s (only the former gets an entry in the volume).[^26] Though
"black British writing" is an area of literature that has "received
generously enhanced coverage" in the latest *Oxford Companion*, most of
the attention goes toward more recent writing, a pattern evident in
literary scholarship as well.[^27] We do not minimize the importance of
research on recent and contemporary writing by writers of diverse
backgrounds (both of us write about and teach this material), but we
hope to contribute to efforts to increase awareness of the varied
writings by people of color in the era of British modernism, broadly
conceived.

Did sites where large numbers of immigrants lived, studied, and worked
receive greater proportional attention in writing by authors with
similar geographic and demographic origins? According to the *London
Encyclopaedia*, in "1911, one in twenty-five of London's residents was
foreign born," but they were not evenly dispersed across the city.[^28]
In the nineteenth century, Chinese, Indian, and Caribbean seamen and
dockworkers settled in Canning Town, Stepney, and Poplar in the East End
of London. Soho was an important center for other immigrant populations
and, by the turn of the century, Bloomsbury housed students from around
the world. Were there differences in the proportional mention of these
and other sites across different types of literature? These questions
raise larger concerns about the relationship between identity and place,
and about the relationship of historical circumstance and literary
representation, which we explore below.

 

Corpora and methods {#corpora-and-methods style="text-align: center;"}
===================

To address these literary-geographic questions, we assembled four
corpora, each comprising books published in Britain between 1880 and
1940. These groups range from the comprehensive to the specialized,
varying in size from over 10,000 books to as few as 130. In all, our
research collections include 10,765 distinct volumes.

The largest of the corpora, labeled "Hathi" in the figures and
discussion below and serving as a type of baseline for the others,
contains 10,010 volumes of fiction published in the UK between 1880 and
1940 and held by the HathiTrust digital library. These volumes are the
ones previously identified by Underwood et al., deduplicated and
restricted to items having bibliographic metadata indicating publication
in Great Britain.[^29]The full text of each volume was included, except
for basic preprocessing to remove paratext such as running heads and
page numbers. The texts in all corpora were identically prepared; they
were supplied by HathiTrust and processed non-expressively. Histograms
of the four corpora by date of publication are presented in figure 1.

::: {#attachment_1546 .image style="width: 650px"}
![](fig-01.png)

Figure 1. Volumes by corpus and year of publication in the research
dataset. Note that the *y-*axes are not shared between corpora; the
Hathi corpus is much larger than the others, which differ in turn from
one another.
:::

The other three corpora are more restricted, though they cover the same
publication dates and broad context of publication. "Prominent British
Fiction" (labeled "Prominent" below), comprises 576 fiction volumes
drawn from three sources that describe and reinforce the canon of
British novels. We used the chronological list of principal literary
works in the widely circulating *Oxford Companion to English
Literature*, now in its seventh edition (2009, ed. Dinah Birch). We
excluded poetry, drama, and nonfiction works listed in the *Companion*;
we included the small number of listed fictional works by non-British
writers (mostly American and Irish). Second, we used Thomas Jackson
Rice's *Bibliography of English Fiction*, 1900-1950 (limited by our
dates).[^30] As an additional measure to insure that the Prominent
corpus includes all fiction that rises to that name, and for added
continuity across the sixty year period, we referred to the Norton
*Anthology of English Literature* (both 8th edition \[2006\] and 9th
edition \[2012\], the latter being the most recent available at the time
of writing). Using the Norton as a proxy for authorial prominence, we
verified that our corpus included every work of fiction by Norton
authors that is listed in Oxford's *The Reinvention of the British and
Irish Novel, 1880-1940*.[^31] Through this process, for example, novels
by Thomas Hardy and Jean Rhys are captured, though only poetry and short
stories, respectively, appear in the Norton.

As the name suggests, the Prominent corpus comprises generally canonical
or near-canonical fiction by writers published in Britain between 1880
and 1940. The prominence of the authors involved produces a corpus that
is closer than any other in our dataset to the contours of canonical
modernism. But we have been careful to avoid referring to it as such
and, indeed, it contains important realist, popular, and topical fiction
alongside aesthetically experimental texts by Woolf, E.M. Forster, D.H.
Lawrence, and so on. When we examine these texts by author gender, race,
and national origin, it reinforces what is generally known: the
traditional canon of British fiction skews white and male. But the
degree of gender and racial disparity might surprise. Of 576 novels,
just 93 were by women, roughly 16%.[^32] All 576
novels[---]{.emdash}100%[---]{.emdash}were written by authors classified
as white. Nearly 90% of authors were born in Britain, the vast majority
of whom (almost 84% of the total) were born in England. The next largest
group may be described as hyphenated anglos (Anglo-Indian, Anglo-Irish,
Anglo-Caribbean, Anglo-American), people of "Anglo-Saxon" ancestry who
were born and perhaps raised in a colonized territory but who spent
significant portions of their lives in Britain (Rudyard Kipling and
George Orwell, for example).[^33] So, "Prominent British fiction," as
constituted by the existing critical literature, is overwhelmingly
white, English, and male.[^34]

The third corpus, London fiction, comprises the 171 available, relevant
books named in three sources devoted to London as a literary site. The
longest of these is the "London" portion of K.D.M. Snell's *Bibliography
of Regional Fiction in Britain and Ireland, 1800-2000* (restricted to
1880-1940 for our purposes).[^35] To insure that this corpus reflects
recent scholarship on the literature of London, we included (place- and
date-restricted) works named in the bibliography of fiction provided by
Richard Dennis in *Cities in Modernity*, and relevant fiction discussed
in peer-reviewed articles of the *Literary London Journal* since its
inaugural issue in 2003. While the London corpus contains a number of
highly canonical novels[---]{.emdash}*The Secret Agent, Mrs.
Dalloway[---]{.emdash}*it is made up, on the whole, of much more obscure
and "popular" texts than those on the Prominent list. This means that
the corpus contains more genre fiction than do the others, especially
detective stories, crime and sensation novels, and sociologically
inflected accounts of extreme poverty and wealth. These 171 texts held
by HathiTrust represent a disappointingly small percentage (48%) of the
359 entries in our consolidated London bibliography. This fact implies
that our large Hathi corpus isn't as complete as researchers in the
field might hope, particularly regarding less prominent works unlikely
to be held by the mostly American universities that generate
HathiTrust's archive. (By comparison, our Prominent source bibliography
numbered 628, of which 576 \[92%\] are in the corpus.)

Finally, we assembled the fourth corpus, "Foreign authors in Britain"
("Foreign")[---]{.emdash}which is in some ways the primary object of our
investigation[---]{.emdash}through reference to seven distinct critical
studies. It includes 130 volumes in sum, drawn from: the bibliographic
"Notes on Writers" in C.L. Innes's *A History of Black and Asian Writing
in Britain, 1700-2000* (limited to the dates of our study); relevant
books discussed by Antoinette Burton, Barbara Bush, Anna Snaith; fiction
identified in David Dabydeen, John Gilmore, and Cecily Jones's *The
Oxford Companion to Black British History*; and books identified in the
archival work of David Killingray, emeritus professor of history at the
University of London (Goldsmiths).[^36]Again, the HathiTrust holdings of
texts in this bibliography are less complete than those of the Prominent
corpus, reflecting the deficits of contributing libraries, which were
historically less likely both to acquire and to preserve these texts, as
well as the texts' sometimes more obscure circumstances of publication;
indeed, our Foreign bibliography lists 259 relevant volumes published
between 1880-1940, almost exactly twice as many as the 130 available for
inclusion in the corpus.

To be included in the Foreign corpus, a book must, in addition to having
been named in the critical sources above, have been produced by a writer
born and raised overseas and outside Europe who was resident in the UK
for some period as an adult, generally as an outsider of one sort or
another. The majority of these authors were from Britain's colonial
possessions, especially in the Caribbean, South Asia, and Africa, and
were of ethnicities other than white Anglo. Nevertheless, the Foreign
corpus includes some books by writers who were generally identified as
white. Most of these authors, like Eliot Bliss, William Plomer, and Jean
Rhys, were born and raised in colonized territories (respectively,
Jamaica, South Africa, and Dominica) as part of a minority population of
colonial occupiers. Again, because we have aimed to focus on the works
and cultural contexts of a subset of authors who have often been left
out of literary study, we have not included white writers from white
settler colonies (Australia, New Zealand, Canada, or the United States),
nor have we included white authors from colonized territories who were
educated in Britain and were more "insiders" than "outsiders" in the
ruling society (such as Rudyard Kipling and George Orwell).[^37]
Including both white and nonwhite authors allows for comparisons between
people who emerged from similar geographical areas but dissimilar social
environments, broadly differentiated by perceived race; included in the
results and analysis below are comparisons of the observed differences
between nonwhite- and white-authored texts from this corpus.[^38] Of
course, such racial labels are troubled and complex, social rather than
biological categories, based on constructions of difference that were
enlisted to justify exploitation and abuse. But they
had[---]{.emdash}and they continue to have[---]{.emdash}important,
tangible political and social meanings.[^39]

Foreign writers, especially those visibly identified as nonwhite, faced
a context of publication different from their white British peers. Among
the effects of this difference was an altered balance between novelistic
fiction and other prose forms. Put simply, foreign writers often
chose[---]{.emdash}or were forced[---]{.emdash}to produce
boundary-crossing works of travelogue, memoir, narrative history, and
expository essays. To exclude these forms would be to exclude a large
portion of literary production by foreigners white and nonwhite alike
during the period under consideration. It would also produce deeply
misleading results, since the novel represented a uniquely minority form
for foreign authors. We have therefore used, following our critical
sources, an expansive understanding of narrative in the Foreign corpus,
controlling as appropriate for the resulting generic diversity.

 

Employing methods previously described[^40] we extracted named locations
from all corpus texts using the Stanford named entity recognizer
(NER)[^41] and associated each location string with detailed present-day
geographic data via Google's Places and Geocoding APIs.[^42] We then
normalized location counts by volume length, reporting comparative
measures on a per-100,000-words basis.[^43] Potential sources of error
between the conceptual formulation of the target literary formations and
the finally extracted geographic data are several. We know that our
bibliographies are subject to interpretation and to the vagaries of
scholars' idiosyncratic selections (as well as our own). Many texts
identified in the sources are unavailable via HathiTrust or, in a small
number of cases, may be misidentified by our automated process of
matching bibliographic records. HathiTrust texts were digitized via
scanning and optical character recognition, and contain numerous
mistranscriptions. The NER process is imperfect, and subsequent
geocoding of even properly recognized locations can fail due to
toponymic ambiguity. Still, our results are encouraging given the
difficulty of the task. We find that we are able to identify correctly
individual places with slightly less than 80% accuracy on average and
that we identify the correct nation-level focus of individual volumes
with better than 96% accuracy (and with region-level accuracy above
92%). Still, these limits suggest why we have chosen to emphasize
comparative and large-scale analyses; our data are in most cases not
sufficiently accurate to support high confidence in the geographic
details of any one text, but they do much better when aggregated over
many texts, especially when our object is to compare differing usage
rates of prominent locations.

 

Results and analysis {#results-and-analysis style="text-align: center;"}
====================

We can begin to summarize our findings by moving from the largest to the
smallest geographic scales. Figure 2 shows the distribution of global
textual attention in the four corpora, summarized by nation. Marker
sizes indicate the total number of mentions, within a given corpus, of
locations at and below the national level (hence excluding supranational
locations such as oceans and continents), scaled in proportion to that
nation's share of the total number of place-name occurrences in each
corpus. There is thus one marker per nation, each of which includes
counts not just for invocations of the nation itself ("India," "United
Kingdom"), but also for every place that falls entirely within the
(modern) bounds of that nation ("New Delhi," "Trafalgar Square").
Markers are centered at the occurrence-weighted mean of the latitude and
longitude of all locations within each nation. This choice for marker
center means that marker locations bear more than the usual amount of
information, since they indicate not just the identity of the nation in
question and the fraction of attention devoted to it, but also summarize
the spatial distribution of textual attention within its borders. This
representation does, however, produce on rare occasions readable but
anomalous results, as when Canada's marker edges into northern Minnesota
(blame the prominence of Toronto and Montreal) and Portugal's falls
somewhere between the island of Madeira (with its toponymic wine) and
the mainland.

**Hathi**

[![](fig-02-Hathi.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-Hathi.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1548 width="640" height="320"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-Hathi.png 3600w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-Hathi-300x150.png 300w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-Hathi-768x384.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-Hathi-1024x512.png 1024w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-02-hathi/)

**Foreign**

[![](fig-02-Foreign.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-Foreign.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1547 width="640" height="320"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-Foreign.png 3600w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-Foreign-300x150.png 300w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-Foreign-768x384.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-Foreign-1024x512.png 1024w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-02-foreign/)

**London**[\
](http://culturalanalytics.org/fig-02-prominent/)

[![](fig-02-London.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-London.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1549 width="640" height="320"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-London.png 3600w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-London-300x150.png 300w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-London-768x384.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-London-1024x512.png 1024w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-02-london/)

**Prominent**

[![](fig-02-Prominent.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-Prominent.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1550 width="640" height="320"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-Prominent.png 3600w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-Prominent-300x150.png 300w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-Prominent-768x384.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-02-Prominent-1024x512.png 1024w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-02-prominent/)

Figure 2. Distribution of global attention in the four corpora,
aggregated by nation and scaled by total location occurrences per
corpus. See text for an explanation of marker sizes and locations.

While the patterns of attention at the global level do differ in
important ways, we may note first that they are not *wholly* different.
This phenomenon has been previously described in other national
contexts[^44] and the same conclusion holds here, albeit prospectively:
the absolute magnitude of changes in the quantifiable characteristics of
large literary corpora are often smaller than the conventional
literary-critical emphasis on difference and discontinuity would lead us
to expect. But small changes are not necessarily unimportant changes.

In the present case, the foreign-authored corpus reflects a
substantially more diverse international outlook than does any of the
other corpora. This is true not only with respect to the United Kingdom,
which accounts for just 18% of all location occurrences in that corpus
compared to as much as 57% of the London corpus, but also to other
European nations and to the United States.[^45] The geographic attention
displaced from such Western sites is reallocated, among foreign writers,
above all to India, China, Japan, South Africa, and the Caribbean,
reflecting a widespread tendency of writers across corpora and periods
to devote statistically disproportionate attention to their spaces of
origin.[^46] Foreign authors were often writing for British and
international audiences alike, and many of their books were specifically
intended to decode British life from the comparative perspective of an
"extimate" colonial subject.

In keeping with critical expectations concerning the
internationalization of literature during the modernist era, we observe
that the fraction of all locations that fall outside the UK in each of
our corpora in the period 1880-1913, prior to the outbreak of the First
World War, is less than that in the period 1914-1940 (with the exception
of the London corpus, which is statistically flat). The changes in
international attention over time are summarized in table 1 and
visualized in figure 3. Beyond the observed rise in international
attention, a comparison between the Prominent and Hathi corpora is
telling. Although critics typically associate internationalization in
the period most strongly with canonical fiction and especially with the
thematic concerns of high modernism, the broad-spectrum record of the
Hathi corpus shows meaningfully greater attention to locations outside
the UK consistently across the period 1880-1940. We thus find our
hypothesis concerning increasing international attention in the long
modernist era to be well supported by our geographic evidence, but
subject to a surprising inversion of expectations with respect to
canonical and noncanonical (or, in Algee-Hewitt et al.'s formulation,
"archival") sources.[^47]

  Corpus      Int'l fraction, 1880-1913   Int'l fraction, 1914-1940   *p*
  ----------- --------------------------- --------------------------- ---------
  Foreign     0.734                       0.889                       1.3e-8
  Hathi       0.703                       0.735                       1.8e-12
  London      0.425                       0.443                       0.51
  Prominent   0.596                       0.650                       0.001

Table 1. Locations outside the UK as a fraction of all locations by
corpus, grouped before and after 1914.

**Hathi**

[\
](http://culturalanalytics.org/fig-03-hathi/)[![](fig-03-Hathi.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-Hathi.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1552 width="640" height="427"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-Hathi.png 3600w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-Hathi-300x200.png 300w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-Hathi-768x512.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-Hathi-1024x683.png 1024w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-03-hathi/)

**Foreign**

[![](fig-03-Foreign.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-Foreign.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1551 width="640" height="427"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-Foreign.png 3600w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-Foreign-300x200.png 300w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-Foreign-768x512.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-Foreign-1024x683.png 1024w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-03-foreign/)

**London**

[![](fig-03-London.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-London.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1553 width="640" height="427"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-London.png 3600w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-London-300x200.png 300w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-London-768x512.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-London-1024x683.png 1024w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-03-london/)

**Prominent**

[![](fig-03-Prominent.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-Prominent.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1554 width="640" height="427"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-Prominent.png 3600w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-Prominent-300x200.png 300w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-Prominent-768x512.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-03-Prominent-1024x683.png 1024w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-03-prominent/)

Figure 3. Fraction of all location mentions devoted to places outside
Great Britain, by date of publication. Each marker represents one
volume, sized in proportion to the total location mentions per 100,000
words in that volume.

Books by foreign writers are also more geographically intensive overall,
containing over twice as many location mentions per hundred thousand
words as those belonging to any of the other corpora (which are
statistically indistinguishable from one another in this regard). The
magnitude of this result is due in large part to the generic diversity
of the Foreign corpus; its nonfiction volumes use named locations at the
rate of 843 ± 115 per 100,000 words, compared to 345 ± 66 in the fiction
volumes (*p* = 7.3e-11). Still, Foreign fiction is significantly more
geographically intensive than any of the other, fiction-only corpora
(Hathi, 281 ± 4, *p* = 0.013; Prominent, 267 ± 13, *p* = 5.9e-4; London,
273 ± 22, *p* = 0.011). For reference, prominent writers whose work is
near the average geographic intensity of volumes in the Prominent corpus
include G.K. Chesterton, Elizabeth Bowen, Graham Greene, and James
Joyce. Virginia Woolf's books use fewer location mentions (212 per
100,000 words, on average). (Readers may also wish to explore an
[interactive visualization](https://plot.ly/~mattwilkens/119) of
geotypicality in five dimensions among authors in all of the
corpora.)[^48]

The case is slightly more complex if we ask, in keeping with our
hypothesis concerning intensity, whether these values rose over time. In
the Foreign and Prominent corpora, the answer is no; in those groups,
intensity fell across the 1914 boundary, dropping in the former to 533
location mentions per 100,000 words in the interwar period from 781 (*p*
= 0.004) before the war and in the latter to 253 from 288 (*p* = 0.006).
The Foreign result is complicated by a corpus composition shift toward
fiction in the latter period (to 48% of volumes from 41%), but the
Prominent result is unambiguous. In the Hathi and London corpora,
geographic intensity is statistically unchanged across the periods
before and after the war. To a first approximation then, the hypothesis
of rising geographic intensity is not supported.

A reasonable alternative reading of Hegglund, however, might interpret
"topographic detail" as not so much a matter of frequency as of
specificity; perhaps interwar literature preferred the specific to the
general, "Bloomsbury" to "Britain" and "Bombay" to "India." To assess
this version of the claim, we calculated the fraction of location
mentions that fall below the level of the country or the city, both in
the UK and abroad. The results, however, are no different in sum. The
Hathi and Prominent corpora became somewhat *less* specific in the
interwar period, while the Foreign and London corpora were, for the most
part, statistically unchanged.[^49] We note that, unlike the intensity
case, we did not observe pervasive generic effects with respect to
specificity in the Foreign corpus; fiction and nonfiction texts were
geographically specific at roughly equal rates.

We did, however, observe significant differences between corpora in
their rates of specificity across the full period 1880-1940. Within the
UK, the London corpus was the most likely to mention locations below the
city level, containing nearly twice the fraction of such uses relative
to the other corpora (40.2% vs. 17-27%, *p* \< 1.4e-17). Books in the
Prominent corpus were more likely than those in the larger Hathi corpus
to use sub-city-level locations in the UK. W. Somerset Maugham, George
Orwell, and Thomas Hardy were near the Prominent average; Virginia Woolf
was far above average, James Joyce somewhat below (though much higher in
Ireland, which, to recall, is not counted as a UK location).

Globally, the Foreign corpus again stood out, although not in the way
one might expect. Foreign volumes, despite their high geographic usage
rates and preponderance of international locations, used the lowest
fraction of locations below the country level outside the UK. That is,
books in the Foreign corpus were more likely to refer to nations as such
rather than to districts, cities, landmarks, and more specific locations
within those nations than were the books in any of the other corpora
(50% below the country level in the Foreign corpus vs. 67-69% in the
others, *p* \< 4.5e-19). We tentatively attribute this finding, which
accords well with research by Boehmer, Fryer, and Macdonald, to foreign
writers' greater investment in geopolitical subject matter compared to
their Britain-born peers, with the result that texts by foreign writers
were more likely to name nations and their relations, while other
writers, when they used foreign locations at all, used them
disproportionately as settings rather than political entities.

Texts drawn from the London corpus featured the highest ratio of UK
domestic locations; these are, after all, books selected specifically
for their focus on London as a British regional site. We note in passing
that it was the Continent that supplied most of the sacrificed
international attention in the London case. The Prominent corpus hewed
more closely to the average domestic-international split observed in the
broad Hathi corpus, but still skewed domestic in comparison (37%
domestic in Prominent vs. 28% domestic in Hathi, *p* = 3.0e-20). This is
a surprising finding, given canonical literature's reputation for
internationalism in the period.[^50]

Within the UK, these trends were in some ways reversed: where foreign
authors made use of significantly more international diversity in their
texts, their UK locations were more heavily concentrated in London than
were those of the large Hathi corpus. (A cartographic overview of the
differences between the corpora is provided in figure 4.) It is the
Hathi corpus, in fact, that was the most domestically diverse, making
use of locations in Greater London (including references to "London"
itself) for just 40% of its total UK place occurrences.

**Hathi**[![](fig-04-Hathi.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-Hathi.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1556 width="640" height="960"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-Hathi.png 1800w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-Hathi-200x300.png 200w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-Hathi-768x1152.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-Hathi-683x1024.png 683w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-04-hathi/)

**Foreign**

[![](fig-04-Foreign.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-Foreign.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1555 width="640" height="960"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-Foreign.png 1800w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-Foreign-200x300.png 200w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-Foreign-768x1152.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-Foreign-683x1024.png 683w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-04-foreign/)

**London**

[![](fig-04-London.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-London.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1557 width="640" height="960"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-London.png 1800w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-London-200x300.png 200w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-London-768x1152.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-London-683x1024.png 683w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-04-london/)

**Prominent**

[![](fig-04-Prominent.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-Prominent.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1558 width="640" height="960"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-Prominent.png 1800w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-Prominent-200x300.png 200w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-Prominent-768x1152.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-04-Prominent-683x1024.png 683w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-04-prominent/)

Figure 4. Distribution of UK attention in four corpora, aggregated by
locality (city) and sized by fraction of total location mentions in each
corpus.

The London corpus was, little surprise, the most focused on London
places, which account for 69% of all its UK domestic location
occurrences. The Prominent corpus closely resembled the foreign-authored
set on this metric, the two using London locations for 46% and 43% of
their UK mentions, respectively (*p* = 0.08, not significant).

If we take London usage rate as a plausible proxy for attention to
urbanization and urban issues (subject to some caveats explored below),
we find general confirmation of the long-standing critical claim that
relatively canonical writing at the end of the nineteenth century and
the first half of the twentieth century (and modernism in particular)
was especially preoccupied with urban spaces. Indeed, texts in the
corpus of prominent British fiction devoted about 6 percentage points
more of their domestic attention to places in London than did those in
the Hathi corpus. So it does appear that there's a detectable
difference, a bend toward the urban, in texts we think of as canonical
compared to British fiction more generally.[^51] Foreign writers weren't
much different from Prominent writers in this regard, both groups
finding, perhaps, a comparatively congenial home in the metropole. But
the existence of the London corpus and its singular geographic focus
demonstrate that there existed a parallel trend in less elevated British
writing of the same period. So, while it may be true that outsider and
(relatively) canonical period texts differentiated themselves in part
through their interest in the city, theirs was an investment shared by
pockets of popular genre and regional fiction as well.

Interesting variations between the corpora also appeared in their
relative attention to locations within London, which are mapped in
figure 5 and summarized via centers of gravity (weighted mean latitude
and longitude of their London locations) in figure 6. A list of the most
frequently occurring London locations is presented in table 2. As is
clear in the summary measure of figure 6, books in the Prominent corpus
favored, on average, locations in the wealthier and more fashionable
West End, while the London corpus leaned toward the working-class East
End. The Hathi corpus stood in the middle; the Foreign corpus edged
west, toward the Prominent average, but was statistically
indistinguishable from either the Hathi or the Prominent corpus. We can
observe notable change over time in each of the corpora with the
exception of the Foreign set (where statistical uncertainty is large).
The center of gravity of the London corpus moved further east after 1914
(the change is relatively large, but not statistically significant due
to the small size of the corpus), while the Hathi corpus drifted
slightly west (borderline significant) and the Prominent corpus moved
mostly north.

The dynamics driving these differences, both between corpora and across
time, are complex. To understand the details (including those not well
captured by averages), to explain the intermediate positions of the
Hathi and Foreign corpora, and to see why the hypothesis of rising
literary-geographic intensity strikes many critics as plausible despite
not being borne out at scale, we need to examine specific locations.

**Hathi**

[![](fig-05-Hathi.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-Hathi.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1560 width="640" height="480"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-Hathi.png 3600w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-Hathi-300x225.png 300w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-Hathi-768x576.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-Hathi-1024x768.png 1024w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-05-hathi/)

**Foreign**

[![](fig-05-Foreign.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-Foreign.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1559 width="640" height="480"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-Foreign.png 3600w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-Foreign-300x225.png 300w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-Foreign-768x576.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-Foreign-1024x768.png 1024w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-05-foreign/)

**London**

[![](fig-05-London.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-London.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1538 width="640" height="480"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-London.png 3600w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-London-300x225.png 300w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-London-768x576.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-London-1024x768.png 1024w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-05-london/)

**Prominent**

[![](fig-05-Prominent.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-Prominent.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1539 width="640" height="480"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-Prominent.png 3600w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-Prominent-300x225.png 300w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-Prominent-768x576.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-05-Prominent-1024x768.png 1024w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-05-prominent/)

Figure 5. Distribution of geographic attention within London, aggregated
by point location, for each of the four corpora. Note that generic
references to "London" are excluded from these maps. Markers are scaled
to represent each location's fraction of total location mentions (not
restricted to London) in the relevant corpus.

**(a) By corpus**

 

[![](fig-06a.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-06a.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1540 width="640" height="480"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-06a.png 3600w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-06a-300x225.png 300w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-06a-768x576.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-06a-1024x768.png 1024w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-06a/)

**(b) By corpus and era**

[![](fig-06b.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-06b.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1541 width="640" height="480"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-06b.png 3600w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-06b-300x225.png 300w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-06b-768x576.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-06b-1024x768.png 1024w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-06b/)

Figure 6. London centers of gravity with probability density clouds (a)
by corpus and (b) by corpus and era (before and after 1914).

\#
:::
:::

Hathi

Foreign

London

Prominent

Text

Frequency

Text

Frequency

Text

Frequency

Text

Frequency

1

London

20.89

London

35.70

London

46.49

London

26.40

2

Richmond

0.33

Richmond

0.66

Bloomsbury

3.05

Richmond

0.75

3

Thames

0.29

Thames

0.48

Paddington

2.20

Soho

0.44

4

Kensington

0.20

Hyde Park

0.46

Oxford Street

0.93

Oxford Street

0.39

5

Hyde Park

0.19

Oxford Street

0.43

Hampstead

0.82

Hampstead

0.39

6

Hampstead

0.18

Greenwich

0.33

Hyde Park

0.82

Putney

0.38

7

Westminster

0.16

Westminster

0.32

Greenwich

0.78

Kensington

0.38

8

Covent Garden

0.16

Kew

0.32

Limehouse

0.77

Thames

0.35

9

Pall Mall

0.15

Kensington Gardens

0.31

Soho

0.77

Hyde Park

0.34

10

Scotland Yard

0.15

London Bridge

0.29

Kensington

0.74

Chelsea

0.29

11

Chelsea

0.15

Kensington

0.29

Hoxton

0.68

Notting Hill

0.29

12

Oxford Street

0.15

Hampstead

0.27

Islington

0.66

Croydon

0.27

13

Greenwich

0.13

Brixton

0.26

West End

0.65

Bloomsbury

0.25

14

Kew

0.13

Buckingham Palace

0.25

Clerkenwell

0.63

Trafalgar Square

0.25

15

Kingston

0.12

Bloomsbury

0.23

London Bridge

0.62

Scotland Yard

0.24

16

Chatham

0.12

East London

0.23

Scotland Yard

0.58

South Kensington

0.24

17

Paddington

0.12

Downing Street

0.22

Park Lane

0.55

West End

0.23

18

Soho

0.12

Kingston

0.16

East End

0.52

Kensington Gardens

0.23

19

London Bridge

0.12

Chelsea

0.15

Thames

0.52

Greenwich

0.21

20

Park Lane

0.11

Camden Town

0.14

Highgate

0.51

Roehampton

0.21

21

Islington

0.11

Kensal Rise

0.14

Bayswater

0.49

Park Lane

0.20

22

Bloomsbury

0.10

Park Lane

0.13

Trafalgar Square

0.49

Covent Garden

0.19

23

West End

0.10

South Kensington Museum

0.13

Covent Garden

0.48

Paddington

0.18

24

Kensington Gardens

0.10

Chatham

0.13

Chelsea

0.44

Westminster

0.18

25

Putney

0.09

Trafalgar Square

0.12

Grosvenor Square

0.44

Tottenham Court Road

0.17

26

Haymarket

0.09

Wardour Street

0.12

Wimpole Street

0.41

Pall Mall

0.16

27

East End

0.09

Holborn

0.12

Tottenham Court Road

0.39

Bayswater

0.15

28

Grosvenor Square

0.09

Mansion House

0.12

Praed Street

0.39

Berkeley Square

0.15

29

Trafalgar Square

0.08

Hammersmith

0.12

Haymarket

0.38

Red Lion Street

0.14

30

Croydon

0.08

East End Of London

0.12

Richmond

0.37

Hyde Park Corner

0.14

[Table 2. London locations occurring most frequently per 100,000 words
in the four corpora. Full lists are available in the data
deposit.]{.tablepress-table-description
.tablepress-table-description-id-67}

 

Class is a structuring force of London geography, with the West End
known for its theaters, clubs, high-end shopping, and exclusive
residential neighborhoods, and the East End long condemned, mourned, or
studied as a region of poverty, crime, and degeneracy (it was "Darkest
England" in one best-selling book of that title). The East End also
included the greatest diversity among its residents' ethnic and
religious affiliations, perceived race, and national origins. We
selected specific sites that might serve as shorthand for the opposed
regions and their particular connotations in order to illuminate their
relative rate of representation in the corpora. To compare the degree of
attention to wealthy areas across the corpora, we grouped mentions of
Chelsea, Mayfair, Belgravia, Bond Street, and Park Lane. To capture
differences in the rate at which poor, East End locations were
mentioned, we grouped together Whitechapel, Limehouse, Mile End Road,
West India Dock Road, and East India Dock Road, as well as the broader
labels East End and East London.

The cluster of rich places received the greatest proportional attention
in the London and Prominent corpora, with Hathi following closely and
Foreign trailing well behind (cross comparisons yield statistical
significance only in the cases of the Foreign corpus vs. the others). It
is not surprising that the Prominent corpus, with its interest in
well-to-do "society" would devote ample attention to the environments of
the rich. The near equal rate of occurrences in the London corpus is
less expected but the sheer number of named London locations in that
corpus makes it more likely that any particular place within the city
would be named. The relatively small degree of attention paid by the
Foreign corpus may, we hypothesize, be explained by these "outsider"
writers' lesser degree of access to the homes and social spaces of the
elite. The well-to-do Mayfair, for example, didn't make it into the top
100 named London locations of the Foreign corpus, though it appeared on
those of the other three.

Our collection of poor, East End locations was, by a large margin, used
most in the London corpus. As table 2 shows, the London corpus was the
only one to include Limehouse or East End among its top twenty named
London locations. Collectively, the relative frequency of poor areas in
the London corpus was more than four times that of any of the other
corpora, which each named those locations at roughly the same rate. The
London corpus contained a greater number of books that capitalized on
the popularity of quasi-sociological or sensational depictions of
poverty (Israel Zangwill's *Children of the Ghetto* and Thomas Burke's
*Limehouse Nights*, for example) and on the enduring draw of crime
fiction (such as Arthur Morrison's *The Hole in the Wall*), leading to
the easterly skew to its center of gravity, already remarked. It is
notable that our group of foreign-born writers were statistically no
more likely than the majority of their British counterparts to write
about the East End even though residents who shared the writers' nations
of origin tended to live in that part of the metropolis.[^52] It may be
that the writers represented in the Foreign corpus, who were
overwhelmingly students and intellectuals from Britain's colonies, felt
as unwelcome in areas of poverty as they did in areas of wealth or were
not predominantly interested in the dock workers and manual laborers who
most often lived in the East of the city.

The most familiar neighborhood of London for readers of literary
modernism is Bloomsbury, which we find named relatively frequently in
all of the corpora. It captured the highest number of relative
occurrences in the London corpus, in which it was the single most
frequently named location within Greater London.[^53] While the fact
that many writers devoted attention to Bloomsbury isn't entirely
surprising, neither is its striking prominence straightforwardly
expected; the Bloomsbury group of writers and artists, after all, wasn't
active until late in our period, and little of the London corpus is made
up by their books. Texts from the more squarely canonical Prominent list
did not mention Bloomsbury as frequently, nor did those in the Foreign
corpus (Bloomsbury ranked 13th and 15th, respectively, among those
corpora's London locations). But the fact that Bloomsbury occupied such
a notable place in the geographic imagination of a wide range of writers
provides further evidence for Sara Blair's assertion that Bloomsbury was
important as a London hub before it gained fame through its association
with its toponymous artistic group. What we know of Bloomsbury on
historical grounds, moreover, makes its frequent use within the London
corpus especially interesting; Bloomsbury was among the most
"international" of domestic locations in the city and in the British
nation, suggesting that, even within domestically oriented writing of
the type associated with our London corpus, there was a legible desire
for foreign heterogeneity.

Relative mentions of Bloomsbury were lowest in the Hathi corpus,
confirming what we suspect, that the books we
read[---]{.emdash}exemplified by the Prominent corpus[---]{.emdash}were
not typical of all that was published, though it should be noted that
they were also not remarkably far off in this case (Bloomsbury comes in
22nd in the larger corpus). This pattern of lowest mention in Hathi
continues when we compare the relative frequency of mentions of the
primary roads that defined the Bloomsbury area (Tottenham Court Road,
Euston Road, and Gray's Inn Road) and of Russell Square at its center,
which provides some reassurance that the Bloomsbury toponym was indeed
primarily geographical.[^54]

More startling, perhaps, is the discovery that Soho significantly
outshone Bloomsbury in the Prominent corpus (it was second only to
Richmond, which lay outside of London in the period concerned). Soho was
of least interest in the Foreign corpus, though, in 41st position, it
was hardly overlooked. This is an interesting discovery because Soho,
like Bloomsbury, was an area known for cosmopolitanism. The foreign
residents of Soho were primarily from Europe, but in the last decades of
our period the always-lively neighborhood became known for its black
night clubs.[^55] Strikingly, then, the Foreign corpus demonstrated
relatively little interest in two of London's most heterogeneous
neighborhoods, just as it paid relatively little attention to areas of
extreme wealth and poverty.

If Bloomsbury was not of particular interest to the writers of the
Foreign corpus, the same cannot be said of the area's most famous
landmark. The British Museum had the greatest rate of mentions among
Foreign writers (whose corpus was the only one to include it in the top
100). The Museum was a popular tourist site throughout the period under
investigation, as it is today, but its singular importance for writers
born outside Great Britain may also have reflected the significance of
the British Museum Reading Room for international students and
intellectuals who came to London to read and to write. When the British
Museum is considered together with several other cultural
sites[---]{.emdash}the National Gallery, London Library, and South
Kensington Museum[---]{.emdash}the relative cumulative mentions of these
cultural institutions were highest in the Foreign and Prominent corpora,
in which they were a statistical tie. These cultural institutions were
least important in the London corpus, perhaps another reflection of the
preponderance of genre fiction within it.

The comparison of top London locations across the corpora produced other
discoveries about the singularity of the Foreign corpus that we find
compelling. It revealed that the Foreign corpus contained a
significantly higher rate of mentions of three types of public sites.
First, Foreign writers paid greatest relative attention to the city's
parks and gardens. When we combine central London's Hyde Park, Green
Park, St. James's Park, Regent's Park, and Kensington Gardens with the
further-flung Kew (south of the Thames, now in the London Borough of
Richmond), the Foreign corpus had over 30% more relative mentions than
any of the other corpora.[^56]

Peter Kalliney has pointed to the importance of the public parks as "one
of the few venues in which recent immigrants and white Londoners meet on
relatively equal terms" in the "emerging postimperial metropolis" of
Selvon's *The Lonely Londoners* (108 and 106). Our findings suggest that
parks were also significant in the earlier experiences of colonial
subjects in pre-1940 imperial London, particularly for writers of color,
as we discuss below.[^57] A second, perhaps related, type of public
space that received greatest relative interest in the Foreign corpus was
river places. The Thames and four of its bridges - Westminster,
Waterloo, London, and Blackfriars - received, in sum, 20-40% more
attention in the Foreign corpus than in the others, though only the
comparison with the Prominent corpus approached statistical
significance.

Finally, we note that the Foreign corpus contained the greatest
proportional mentions of the politically inflected sites Westminster,
Downing Street, and Hyde Park Corner, taken as a group. One might
explain the greater prominence of these locations in the Foreign corpus
as deriving from the sites' touristic value, as could be the case with
the parks and cultural institutions discussed above. However, the
anti-imperial movements increasingly active between 1880 and 1940
suggest that at least part of their significance among foreign writers
was political in nature. That Scotland Yard, by contrast, received the
least relative attention in the Foreign corpus suggests both that
writers born and raised outside of Great Britain were more interested in
policy than policing and that they tended to work outside the generic
concerns typical of popular fiction.[^58] The reverse could be said of
the London corpus, in which Westminster was ranked lower than in any of
the other sets. The Foreign corpus, then, was distinct from the corpora
dominated by native British writers in that it attached greater
significance to London's parks and gardens, river places, and political
sites. It was notable, too, for its comparatively high rate of interest
in cultural institutions, equivalent to that in the Prominent corpus,
and for its lesser attention to neighborhoods of extreme wealth and
poverty and to cosmopolitan Soho.

 

To explore the effects of ethnic difference on the literary-geographic
attention of non-native authors, we compared the distribution of
attention within the Foreign corpus between writers who identified (or
who were identified) as white and those who did (or were) not. This was
an obvious, important, and often visible source of social
differentiation that corresponds only very imperfectly to any of the
other divisions between our corpora. In many ways, the observed
differences are modest; nonwhite and white foreign authors' usage rates
of international and domestic locations, of our selected political and
cultural sites in London, as well as London's share of their British
spatial attention, were statistically indistinguishable, and the
patterns of their global usage, while distinct, seem to reflect
primarily the specific identities of their home countries, a pattern
that we have already seen at both large and small scales and that seems
linked more closely to national origin than to ethnicity.

Meaningful differences did exist in several areas. White writers in the
Foreign corpus used global locations that were specific below the city
level at rates higher than their nonwhite counterparts (21% vs 17%, *p*
= 0.01). If our hypothesis that such specificity was inversely
correlated with political content in the literature of the period is
correct[---]{.emdash}that is, that specificity is often a matter of
political abstraction vs. literary-narrative detail[---]{.emdash}this
fact suggests that the nonwhite Foreign writers in our corpus were
responsible for texts that were comparatively politically intensive.
This finding accords well with both the existing critical literature on
colonial-era writing and with our own sense of the texts that make up
the Foreign corpus.

Also telling is the map of each group's geographic usage within London,
where they were alike outsiders, but often of importantly different
types.

**(a) Nonwhite**

[![](fig-07a.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07a.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1542 width="640" height="480"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07a.png 3600w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07a-300x225.png 300w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07a-768x576.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07a-1024x768.png 1024w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-07a/)

**(b) White**

[![](fig-07b.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07b.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1543 width="640" height="480"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07b.png 3600w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07b-300x225.png 300w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07b-768x576.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07b-1024x768.png 1024w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-07b/)

**(c) By ethnicity**

[![](fig-07c.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07c.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1544 width="640" height="480"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07c.png 3600w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07c-300x225.png 300w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07c-768x576.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07c-1024x768.png 1024w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-07c/)

**(d) By genre**

[![](fig-07d.png "http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07d.png"){.aligncenter
.wp-image-1545 width="640" height="480"
sizes="(max-width: 640px) 100vw, 640px"
srcset="https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07d.png 3600w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07d-300x225.png 300w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07d-768x576.png 768w, https://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/fig-07d-1024x768.png 1024w"}](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/07/nation-ethnicity-and-the-geography-of-british-fiction-1880-1940/fig-07d/)

Figure 7. Distribution of geographic attention in London within the
Foreign corpus (a and b) aggregated by point location and distinguished
by author ethnicity class; (c and d) centers of gravity by ethnicity
class and by genre.

The greater variety of places mentioned by nonwhite writers is in part
an artifact of their larger representation in the Foreign corpus; more
books mean a greater chance that rare locations will be mentioned at
least once. But the overall pattern is subtly different. The center of
gravity of places used by nonwhite authors lies further south and a bit
to the west of that for white authors. Nonwhite writers paid more
attention to locations directly on the Thames, especially bridges and
tourist-associated points. This pattern, in fact, more closely matches
that of the Hathi and Prominent corpora than does that of the white
foreign writers, potentially suggesting that, while the two groups were
alike shaped by their status as outsiders, nonwhite writers presented a
London slightly more closely aligned with that of their domestic British
literary peers than did their less racialized foreign counterparts.

When we examine the set of prominent parks and green spaces that were
used more frequently in the Foreign corpus than in any other, we find
that it is texts by nonwhite writers that drive the whole of the
difference; books by white authors use parks at rates similar to those
of the other corpora (which are made up almost exclusively of
white-authored volumes). It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that
what Kalliney argued with respect to Sam Selvon's post-1945 cultural
milieu[---]{.emdash}that such public spaces were especially linked to
the literary and political imagination of nonwhite writers in
Britain[---]{.emdash}was broadly applicable in the period before World
War II. It is our hope that they will be the object of increased
critical attention in the future.

 

Conclusions {#conclusions style="text-align: center;"}
===========

The amount of information we have presented is formidable and our
results point in several directions. How can we summarize the patterns
of shared and differential attention we have observed in our corpora?
For one thing, we have produced new data that bear directly on existing
critical arguments concerning the development of British fiction in the
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. We have found that, in
keeping with broadly shared expectations, the texts in all of our
corpora devoted more of their geographic attention to locations outside
Great Britain in the period after the Great War than they had in the
decades leading up to it, suggesting that postwar literature was indeed
marked by its increased internationalization. This change was steady,
cumulative, and not obviously linked to any one moment or event. As we
noted at the outset and detailed above (see figure 3 and related
discussion), however, while a historical rise in international attention
was shared across the corpora, the baseline levels from which that rise
occurred were meaningfully different. Texts in the Prominent corpus were
approaching by 1940 a level of non-British geographic use that Hathi
texts had attained, on average, more than 60 years earlier. Both corpora
lagged behind the Foreign set, especially by the end of the period.

We have, in this case, one instructively ambivalent answer to the
question of whether or not the modernist-era books that critics are most
likely to read serve as a reasonable proxy for the period's literature.
The international trend that is recognizable in well-known texts
reflected a development that was taking place more widely at the time;
in that sense, insights gained from canonical fiction do not mislead.
But well-known fiction was notably conservative when it came to
representing the world beyond British borders and was therefore a
trailing indicator of the wider literary culture's outward turn. In that
sense, the books in the Prominent corpus are, collectively, a poor
object on which to build an understanding of how British literature
evolved between 1880 and 1940.

At some level, most critics already know this. They (and we) care about
Woolf and Joyce and the like exactly because those authors' work did not
represent the average or typical product of the early twentieth century.
But we want to insist that there are cases[---]{.emdash}the present one
very much included[---]{.emdash}in which such an appeal to
exceptionalism fails. It fails because the phenomenon of interest within
the canon[---]{.emdash}an increasing investment in the world beyond the
borders of Britain[---]{.emdash}is one that emerged earlier and more
dramatically elsewhere. It's hard to know, in general, when such a
temporal misalignment will have been the historical case, because canons
exist to contain the abundance of that "elsewhere." In this instance,
however, there is good evidence that a move beyond the usual sources has
given us a better, richer, more deeply contextualized understanding of
canonical and archival sources alike.

The representational value of canonical texts is similarly mixed in the
case of Hegglund's carefully articulated argument concerning
"topographic intensity." The interwar period's writing does not appear
to have become notably more specific or more intensive in its use of
geographic space, whether in canonical sources or elsewhere. We have
offered two possible explanations for this fact, both of which were
probably at work across the diverse volumes of our corpora. In the case
of specificity, less detailed use of geographic space can be found in
some varieties of political writing, especially those devoted to
international and colonial relations in which the actors and objects of
attention are more likely to be nations than cities or individual sites.
If such political content was increasingly incorporated into interwar
literature, it would have resulted in lower average specificity across
the corpora, all else being equal.

Concerning geographic intensity, which, like specificity, was flat or
decreasing across the full period 1880-1940, we note only that this fact
may be relevant to longstanding critical debates concerning the role of
psychological interiority as a signal feature of modernist literature,
on the assumption that narratives focused on states of mind may find
geographic detail less suited to their purposes than would more
externally directed accounts. If descriptions of interiority did consume
a greater share of literary attention in the interwar years, this fact
would help to explain why the era's geographic intensity failed to rise
even if there existed a slight increase in baseline geographic or
topographic interest. Critical investment in certain categories of
spatial use may also explain why Hegglund's argument that geographic
intensity or specificity rose in the modernist era seems plausible
despite not being supported by our evidence. Select, notably famous
locations such as Trafalgar Square, Bloomsbury, Soho, Buckingham Palace,
and the like did see collectively increased use in the years after 1914.
If critical attention were devoted to these places in preference to the
full range of named locations that appeared in the era's literature,
then it is not difficult to see how an impression of rising geographic
intensity, at least with respect to British fiction's most prominent
city and in its most widely read books, could have formed.

We also recall that our task was in part descriptive: what was the
distribution of literary-geographic attention in British fiction written
and published during the six decades preceding the Second World War,
previously unknown at large scale? To this question, we have some
answers. British fiction of the period, considered as a pseudo-whole
across more than 10,000 volumes and a billion words, was notably
international, mentioning places outside the UK more than twice as often
as those within it. When considering domestic locations, London was
dominant even relative to its large population, accounting for more than
twice the literary location share (circa 40% of the UK total) as the
area did population share in 1900.[^59] These figures represent a
substantial difference from the American case, where literary attention
in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries alike was more domestically
focused, yet more diversely distributed within the home nation.[^60] The
sources of this national difference are several and difficult to trace
in full, but are, we speculate, related to Britain's historically
greater international role at the time (including its status as a more
globally expansive imperial power), its relative prosperity and
proximity to the Continent, its comparatively compact size, and,
domestically, the singular importance of its largest city.[^61]

In all of the corpora, geographic attention remains focused largely on a
notional map of early- to mid-period Western industrial modernity,
comprising principally locations in the UK, US, and Western Europe,
though with historically conditioned attention to India that serves as
one indication of the role of empire in shaping cultural production. The
fit between this imagined map and, for example, global population is
poor. We observe[---]{.emdash}as did Heuser et al. in their studies of
earlier texts[^62][---]{.emdash}a similar distortion with respect to the
population density of London itself, where literary locations represent
only imperfectly the distribution of the city's habitation, reflecting a
self-perpetuating set of traditionally significant sites. This fact in
turn suggests one of the sources of the stability we note across corpora
and time: cultural forms have conservative inertial weight, making their
sites, styles, forms, and subject matters more likely to be carried
forward in preference to new forms that compete to displace them without
the benefits of incumbency.

Given the overall conservatism of aspects of literary geography, even
modest differences between corpora and subsets can be vitally important.
It is our sense that one of the challenges of quantitatively oriented
literary criticism in the years ahead will be to calibrate our
expectations concerning the magnitude of important shifts in the
measurable properties of our texts. While there is obviously no single
standard to be applied across research projects, these are important
conversations to foster by way of specific results. In the present case,
we have seen statistical significance attached to differences as small
as a few percent, especially in the large Hathi corpus, but we note that
the technical sense of "significant" doesn't always imply the colloquial
sense of importance. In the discussion above, we have taken care to
present findings that we believe to be meaningful in the latter sense
while also testing for the former sense. That said, some instances are
easier; there are times when we observe strikingly large quantitative
and qualitative differences between texts at scale, as, for example, in
the cases of the international and London fractions of the four corpora.
When we construct a corpus around a specific textual facet, it is
possible to see very large deviations in that facet compared to a
baseline corpus. This won't always be the case, of course, but the fact
that it's possible argues for the standard use of reference corpora for
computational and qualitative criticism alike.

What we do not observe are large, sudden changes in the features we
examined within any one corpus. Surely such changes do sometimes occur,
but we don't see them here, nor have they emerged in many other
quantitatively oriented literary projects devoted to the study of large
corpora. While this fact does not necessarily imply that critics'
existing concepts of periodization are wrong, the ways in which many
critics model periodizing change could probably use revision in their
light. In the course of reading a few books, it is both easy and (often)
desirable to emphasize the myriad differences between them. A model of
periodization that scales up differences between books to differences
between eras will, almost inevitably, translate the genuinely sharp
distinctions between individual texts to the much larger classes of
which those texts are presumptively representative members. But
representation and typicality, on the evidence presented
here[---]{.emdash}and, surely, in the light of critical
experience[---]{.emdash}do not work in such direct terms, especially
when the distinctions at issue are diachronic and continuous rather than
synchronic and cross-sectional. Modernist studies perhaps finds models
of discontinuity even more attractive than do other areas of literary
studies; the avant-garde movements that form one of the field's core
objects certainly did. Modernists would be well served to balance that
tendency with a robust appreciation of the roles played by continuity
and incremental historical change within the literatures and cultures
they seek to decode.

Concerning the foreign corpus that has been the object of our particular
attention, we find support for the view that foreign writers were more
likely to act as social outsiders, distributing their
attention[---]{.emdash}within a larger framework of
continuity[---]{.emdash}to locations that were more lightly engaged by
native British authors. Foreign writers were in some cases less likely
to adopt the spatial conventions of genre fiction. This may be a matter
of privilege, or lack thereof; detective stories may not be especially
high prestige, but the market for them is not equally open to all
writers. At the same time, there were likely selection effects at play.
The foreign writers who lived and worked in Britain before the Second
World War were disproportionately students and intellectuals, often
drawn from the colonial elite, and frequently returned to their home
countries after a period of some years in the UK. This meant, in turn,
that their imagined audiences were not necessarily exclusively
native-born white British readers, a fact that likewise shaped the
market for their work. Further, the foreign writers' greater interest in
locations of government and iconic sites of British history, along with
their greater geographic intensiveness overall, suggests that these
writers, and especially colonial writers of color, may have employed
topography to express their knowledge of and, by extension, their power
within, the imperial metropolis and to place themselves on the map at
"the heart of empire."[^63]

Paul Gilroy emphasized almost twenty years ago the urgent, continuing
need for attention to the geography of colonial-era London, arguing that
"before we can be plausibly post-anything, we have to comprehend the
colonial character of this city in a more profound manner than has
happened before. Secondly, we have to produce histories of the city ...
which allow the presence of diverse colonial peoples and their
stubbornly non-colonial descendants far greater significance than they
have been allowed in the past."[^64] The numbers within our Foreign
corpus are relatively small, just 88 volumes by nonwhite authors and 42
by whites. This fact forecloses the more detailed cross-ethnic
comparison that is obviously desirable with respect to the otherwise
flattening category "nonwhite." But even "just" 88 volumes by nonwhite
writers in Britain published before 1940 is an order of magnitude or
more than have been treated in all but a few previous studies of the
field.

To the extent that our findings accord with the existing
criticism[---]{.emdash}as when we observe, on the part of racialized
foreign writers, increased geographic diversity at the international and
intra-London levels, but a decreased range of other locations within
Britain[---]{.emdash}we provide new detail to the longstanding project
of recovery and expansion in British literary studies. Where our results
differ[---]{.emdash}on the relatively close large-scale alignment of
ethnically heterogeneous foreign writers in the period, for instance, or
the declining geographic intensity and specificity of texts published
after the First World War[---]{.emdash}we hope to have offered new
pieces of evidence toward a more robust understanding of the forces that
shaped ethnically and politically diverse literature in the years
between 1880 and 1940. The work that follows from our results on this
front is as likely to be small-scale and critical as it is large-scale
and quantitative. That there are opportunities for such blended research
within modernist studies, informed and shaped by quantitative literary
geography, is the last of our interventions and the guiding principle of
our own future research.

 

 

[^1]: Special thanks to David Killingray, who assisted with research on
    foreign writers in Britain, and to Kara Mlynski, Patrick Evans, John
    Villaflor, Megan Kollitz, Dr. Melissa Dinsman, and Erik-John Fuhrer,
    who helped to prepare the corpora. Any errors are our own. The
    present work is an outcome of the Textual Geographies project, with
    funding support from the American Council of Learned Societies, the
    National Endowment for the Humanities (\#HK-250673-16 to Wilkens),
    and the University of Notre Dame. We gratefully acknowledge their
    assistance. Guangchen Ruan (Indiana University Data to Insight
    Center) assisted with large-scale named entity recognition over the
    full HathiTrust corpus, on which data this essay depends. For a
    listing of corpora and associated data, see the data deposit for
    this article.

[^2]: An extended discussion of existing work on modernist-era literary
    geography follows below. Key studies include books such as Peter
    Brooker, *Bohemia in London: The Social Scene of Early Modernism*
    (Houndmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004); Jon Hegglund,
    *World Views: Metageographies of Modernist Fiction;* Peter J.
    Kalliney, *Cities of Affluence and Anger: A Literary Geography of
    Modern Englishness* (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press,
    2006); Anna Snaith, *Modernist Voyages: Colonial Women Writers in
    London*, 1890-1945 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014);
    Andrew Thacker, *Moving through Modernity;* Andrea Zemgulys,
    *Modernism and the Locations of Literary Heritage* (Cambridge:
    Cambridge UP, 2008).

[^3]: A contrary strain of *völkisch* nationalism was never absent from
    the period, most famously in Martin Heidegger's work, but clear in
    F.R. Leavis and, in the United States, in John Crowe Ransom and the
    Southern Agrarians.

[^4]: Jon Hegglund, *World Views: Metageographies of Modernist Fiction*
    (Oxford: Oxford UP, 2012, 9-10.

[^5]: See, for example, treatments of the London of Charles Dickens and
    of Arthur Conan Doyle in two otherwise disparate sources, Franco
    Moretti's *Atlas of the European Novel 1800-1900* (London: Verso,
    1998) and the online magazine the *Londonist*, \"[The London of
    Charles Dickens:
    Mapped](http://londonist.com/2016/09/the-london-of-charles-dickens-mapped)\"
    and \"[The London of Sherlock
    Holmes...Mapped](http://londonist.com/2009/11/the_london_of_sherlock_holmesmapped).\"
    See Lynne Walker, "Vistas of Pleasure: Women Consumers of Urban
    Space in the West End of London 1850-1900," *Women in the Victorian
    Art World*, ed. Clarissa Campbell Orr (Manchester: Manchester UP,
    1995) for an analysis of the interdependence between the West End of
    London and the late nineteenth-century women's movement.

[^6]: In her first review for the *Times Literary Supplement*, in 1905,
    Woolf critiqued two examples of the genre, *The Thackeray Country*
    and *The Dickens Country*. She faulted both for, among other things,
    having misleading titles that underplay the centrality of urban
    rather than rural environments in Thackeray and Dickens's writing.
    See Virginia Woolf, "Literary Geography," \[1905\] *The Essays of
    Virginia Woolf.* Vol 1. Ed. Andrew McNeillie (London: Hogarth Press,
    1986).

[^7]: Julian Wolfreys, *Writing London*. Volume 2: Materiality, Memory,
    Spectrality (Houndmill, England: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004).

[^8]: Generalist cultural histories of London include books such as
    Peter Ackroyd, *London: The Biography* (New York: Doubleday, 2000),
    David Kynaston, *City of London*. 4 Vols. (London: Chatto & Windus,
    1994-2001), and Roy Porter, *London: A Social History* (Cambridge,
    MA: Harvard UP, 1995).

[^9]: For example, Peter Brooker and Andrew Thacker's edited collection
    *Geographies of Modernism* begins with the observation that "we have
    recently witnessed a strong interest in the spatial and geographical
    dimensions of literary and cultural texts." Peter Brooker and Andrew
    Thacker, eds. *Geographies of Modernism: Literatures, Cultures,
    Spaces* (London: Routledge, 2005), 1.

[^10]: See especially Susan Stanford Friedman, *Mappings: Feminism and
    the Cultural Geographies of Encounter* (Princeton and Oxford:
    Princeton, 1998), Franco Moretti's *Atlas of the European Novel* and
    *Graphs, Maps, Trees* (London: Verso, 2005), and Mikhail Bakhtin,
    *The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays*, ed. Michael Holquist,
    trans. Caryl Emerson and Michael Holquist (Austin: University of
    Texas Press, 1982).

[^11]: Richard Dennis, *Cities in Modernity: Representations and
    Productions of Metropolitan Space, 1840-1930* (Cambridge: Cambridge
    UP, 2008), 105.

[^12]: On cities and identity, see, for example, edited collections such
    as Dana Arnold, ed., *The Metropolis and its Image: Constructing
    Identities for London*, c. 1750-1950 (Oxford: Blackwell, 1999) and
    Felix Driver and David Gilbert, eds., *Imperial Cities: Landscape,
    Display and Identity* (Manchester: Manchester UP, 1999).

[^13]: Ian Baucom, *Out of Place: Englishness, Empire and the Locations
    of Identity* (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1999), 4.

[^14]: Andrew Thacker, *Moving through Modernity: Space and Geography in
    Modernism* (Manchester: Manchester UP, 2003), 5.

[^15]: Eric Bulson, *Novels, Maps, Modernity: The Spatial Imagination,
    1850-2000* (New York: Routledge, 2007), 2.

[^16]: Other critics have argued for changes in spatial representation
    but not always with such concrete and measurable claims. Nico
    Israel, for instance, finds that "locations beyond England and
    America appear frequently as the subjects of \[modernist\] texts,
    and in previously unimaginable ways" and observes an \"immense
    conceptual distance between Stoker's or Kipling's sense of place and
    space and Joyce's or Beckett's[---]{.emdash}just as there is between
    Stoker's and Kipling's and Dickens's and Eliot's. Nico Israel,
    "Geography," in *A Companion to Modernist Literature and
    Culture,* eds. Bradshaw and Dettmar, 2006, 127, 131.

[^17]: Jonathan Schneer, *London 1900: The Imperial Metropolis* (New
    Haven & London: Yale UP, 1999), 19. Felix Driver and David Gilbert
    have stressed how imperialism was also imbued in such apparently
    innocent spaces as gardens with "oriental" landscaping and exotic
    species and in the naming of streets and houses after imperial
    campaigns ("Heart"), while Ian Black has argued that the imperial
    classical design of City of London banks built in the 1920s and 30s
    aimed to bolster fading confidence in the City's status as the
    "heart of empire." Felix Driver and David Gilbert, "Heart of Empire?
    Landscape, Space and Performance in Imperial London," in
    *Environment and Planning D: Society and Space* 16 (1998): 11-28;
    Ian S. Black, "Rebuilding 'The Heart of the Empire': Bank
    Headquarters in the City of London, 1919-1939," in *The Metropolis
    and its Image: Constructing Identities for London, c. 1750-1950*,
    ed. Dana Arnold (Oxford: Blackwell, 1999), 127-52.

[^18]: Elleke Boehmer, *Empire, the National, and the Postcolonial,
    1890-1920: Resistance in Interaction* (Oxford: Oxford UP, 2002), 20.

[^19]: Peter Fryer, *Staying Power: The History of Black People in
    Britain* (London: Pluto Press, 1984), 272.

[^20]: Roderick J. Macdonald, "'The Wisers Who Are Far Away': The Role
    of London's Black Press in the 1930s and 1940s," in *Essays on the
    History of Blacks in Britain: From Roman Times to the Mid-Twentieth
    Century*, eds. Jagdish S. Gundara and Ian Duffield (Avebury:
    Aldershot, England, 1992), 166.

[^21]: This despite efforts to educate citizens that diversity was part
    of Britain from its beginnings, such as the Museum of London's
    project "'The Peopling of London,' the aim of which was to call
    attention to 15,000 years of settlement" and websites like [*Making
    Britain.*](http://www.open.ac.uk/researchprojects/makingbritain/) (John
    McLeod, *Postcolonial London: Rewriting the Metropolis* (London:
    Routledge, 2004), 6.) Significant historical studies include
    monographs by Elleke Boehmer, *Empire, the National, and the
    Postcolonial*; Barbara Bush, I*mperialism, Race and Resistance:
    Africa and Britain 1919-1945* (London: Routledge, 1999); Peter
    Fryer, *Staying Power: The History of Black People in Britain*
    (London: Pluto Press, 1984); Jeffrey Green, *Black Edwardians: Black
    People in Britain 1901-1914* (London: Frank Cass, 1998); C.L. Innes,
    *A History of Black and Asian Writing in Britain, 1700-2000*
    (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2002); Marc Matera, *Black London: The
    Imperial Metropolis and Decolonization in the Twentieth Century*
    (Oakland: The University of California Press, 2015); Sukhdev Sandhu,
    *London Calling: How Black and Asian Writers Imagined a City*
    (London: Harper Perennial, 2003); Jonathan Schneer, *London 1900:
    The Imperial Metropolis *(New Haven & London: Yale UP, 1999); Rozina
    Visram, *Ayahs, Lascars and Princes: The Story of Indians in Britain
    1700-1947* (London: Pluto Press, 1986).

[^22]: In books that focus on the intersection of imperialism and London
    writing, writers of color prior to the 1950s are often silently
    elided, or given only passing mention. Jed Esty's important book on
    the postwar period, for instance, acknowledges that "writers from
    the colonies and ex-colonies had been a formative part of the London
    literary scene for decades" but names only white writers by way of
    examples. Jed Esty, *A Shrinking Island: Modernism and National
    Culture in England* (Princeton and Oxford: Princeton UP, 2004), 200.

[^23]: See Fred D'Aguiar, "Against Black British Literature," in
    *Tibisiri: Caribbean Writers and Critics*, ed. Maggie Butcher
    (Coventry: Dangaroo, 1989), 106-14; Bénédicte Ledent, "Black British
    Literature," *Oxford Companion to English Literature*. 7th ed. Ed.
    Dinah Birch (Oxford: Oxford UP, 2009), 17-22; and John McLeod, "Some
    Problems with 'British' in a 'Black British' Canon," *Wasafiri*
    17.36 (2002): 56-59, for discussion of the history of the category
    "Black British" and its political benefits and limitations.

[^24]: "Expansion" is identified as "a single word to sum up
    transformations in modernist literary scholarship over the past
    decade or two" in Doug Mao and Rebecca Walkowitz, "The New Modernist
    Studies," *PMLA* 123.3 (2008): 737-48, and the trend has continued
    unabated in the decade since. Groundbreaking scholarship such as
    Jessica Berman, *Modernist Commitments: Ethics, Politics, and
    Transnational Modernism* (New York: Columbia UP, 2011), Sara Blair,
    "Local Modernity, Global Modernism: Bloomsbury and the Places of the
    Literary." *ELH* (Fall 2004): 813-838, Mary Lou Emery, *Modernism,
    the Visual, and Caribbean Literature* (Cambridge: Cambridge UP,
    2007), and Anna Snaith, *Modernist Voyages: Colonial Women Writers
    in London, 1890-1945* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014),
    has begun to illuminate how colonial writers of color responded to
    and shaped cultural forms throughout the coinciding periods of high
    imperialism and high modernism in varied and vital ways. Outside the
    British context, Richard Jean So and Hoyt Long have made important
    contributions to comparative modernist studies using computational
    methods, including social network analysis to map publishing
    cultures in the U.S., China, and Japan and machine learning to trace
    the evolution of the English-language haiku as a modernist form.
    Richard Jean So and Hoyt Long, "Network Analysis and the Sociology
    of Modernism," *Boundary* 2. 40.2 (2013): 147-82; "Literary Pattern
    Recognition: Modernism between Close Reading and Machine Learning,"
    *Critical Inquiry* 42.2 (2016): 235-67.

[^25]: Ledent, "Black British Literature," 17

[^26]: Ledent also names the much earlier Olaudah Equiano (c. 1745-1797)
    and Mary Seacole (1805-1881).

[^27]: Dinah Birch, ed., *Oxford Companion to English Literature*. 7th
    ed. Oxford: Oxford UP, 2009, ix.

[^28]: Ben Weinreb, Christopher Hibbert, Julia Keay, and John Keay, *The
    London Encyclopaedia*. 3rd Ed. (London: Macmillan, 2008), 427.

[^29]: Specifically, those with MARC publication location "enk" or an
    imprint entry beginning with "London." We accepted Underwood et
    al.'s selection of volumes at least 50% likely to be 80% precise in
    their classification as fiction. For details, see Ted Underwood,
    "Understanding Genre in a Collection of a Million Volumes," Interim
    performance report, NEH Digital Humanities Start-Up Grant. 29
    December, 2014, as well as the code supplement to the present
    article. Researchers working with HathiTrust sources may be
    interested in the number of volumes culled at each stage of corpus
    assembly. Underwood et al. identify 101,948 volumes of
    English-language fiction in the HathiTrust public domain holdings
    and 104,043 such volumes in the in-copyright collection. Of these
    205,991 volumes, 51,393 (25%) were published in the UK, of which
    20,170 (9.8% of the total, 39% of British volumes) have publication
    dates between 1880 and 1940. See Ted Underwood, Boris Capitanu,
    Peter Organisciak, Sayan Bhattacharyya, Loretta Auvil, Colleen
    Fallaw, J. Stephen Downie. \"[Word Frequencies in English-Language
    Literature, 1700-1922 (0.2)](http://dx.doi.org/10.13012/J8JW8BSJ)\"
    \[Dataset\]. HathiTrust Research Center, 2015. HathiTrust contains a
    significant number of duplicate volumes; discarding second (and
    subsequent) items that share the same author and title, we are left
    with 11,414 distinct volumes. We lack geographic information for a
    small percentage of these and have identified a handful of others as
    nonfiction, bringing us to our reported working corpus size of
    10,010 volumes. Our other bibliographies lack geographic data for no
    more than a trivial number of identified volumes, though they face
    other limitations related to Hathi's holdings as described below.

[^30]: Rice employed three criteria to select authors for inclusion:
    \"(1) all generally acknowledged 'major'
    novelists[---]{.emdash}Conrad, Joyce, Lawrence, and Woolf ... and
    those one might call the 'second echelon' of major-minor
    novelists[---]{.emdash}Bennett, Ford, Forster, Galsworthy, Huxley,
    Maugham, Orwell, Waugh, and Wells; (2) all major men of letters who,
    though they may be better known for their achievements in other
    fields, have made a significant contribution to modern
    fiction[---]{.emdash}Aldington, Beerbohm, Chesterton, C.S. Lewis,
    and Wyndham Lewis; and (3) all so-called minor writers who have,
    nonetheless, attracted a significant amount of bibliographical,
    biographical, or critical commentary, and who have contributed
    significantly to the development of modern long and short fiction in
    Britain[---]{.emdash}Bowen, Compton-Burnett, Douglas, Firbank,
    Hartley, Lehmann, Macaulay, Mansfield, Munro, Myers, J.C. and T.F.
    Powys, Richardson, Rolfe, West, and Williams.\" Thomas Jackson Rice,
    "Introduction: The Scope and Format of this Guide," *English
    Fiction, 1900-1950: General Bibliography and Individual Authors: A
    Guide to Information Sources*. 2 Vol. (Detroit: Gale Research Co.,
    c. 1979).

[^31]: We did not use *The Reinvention of the British and Irish Novel,
    1880-1940* as a basis for our list because its (deliberate and
    admirable) inclusion of little-known works would have misrepresented
    what is commonly read, taught, and studied, which was the aim of
    this corpus. Patrick Parrinder and Andrzej Gasiorek, *The
    Reinvention of the British and Irish Novel*, 1880-1940. Vol. 4 of
    *The Oxford History of the Novel in English* (Oxford: Oxford UP,
    2011), 609-33.

[^32]: For a survey of the long history of women writers' absence from
    anthologies (and, hence, from the domain of study), see Laura C.
    Mandell, "Gendering Digital Literary History: What Counts for
    Digital Humanities," in *A New Companion to Digital Humanities*, 2nd
    ed. Eds. Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, and John Unsworth (Hoboken,
    NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 2016), 511-23. Regarding the recurring neglect
    of women writers in modernist studies, see Anne Fernald, "Women's
    Fiction, New Modernist Studies, and Feminism," *Modern Fiction
    Studies* 59.2 (2013): 229-40, and Jane Garrity, "Found and Lost: The
    Politics of Modernist Recovery," *Modernism/modernity* 15.4 (2008):
    803-12.

[^33]: Authors were identified as white or nonwhite on the basis of
    historical-biographical research. We required an unambiguous and
    uncontested attribution of ethnic identity in a published source.
    Where such an attribution was unavailable, ethnicity was not
    included in our dataset.

[^34]: For reasons of scope, gender is not a primary focus of the
    current article. We expect to examine the relationships between
    gender and literary geography in future work related to Evans's
    forthcoming *Threshold Modernism: New Public Women and the Literary
    Spaces of Imperial London *(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
    forthcoming 2018)*.*

[^35]: Snell defines "regional fiction" as "fiction that is wholly or
    largely set in a particular geographical region, and which purports
    to describe or use recognisable and distinctive features of the
    life, customs, language, dialect, or other aspects of that area's
    culture and people." K. D. M. Snell, *The Bibliography of Regional
    Fiction in Britain and Ireland, 1800-2000* (Hants, England: Ashgate,
    2002), 2. He also includes "fiction that conveys a strong sense of
    local geography, topography or landscape," as well as, beyond
    novels, "some items of a semi-autobiographical/fictional character"
    (2, 9). Snell notes that his definition of regional fiction "shares
    much with those adopted by other authors," including *The Concise
    Oxford Companion to English Literature* (2).

[^36]: Antoinette Burton, *At the Heart of the Empire: Indians and the
    Colonial Encounter in Late-Victorian Britain* (Berkeley: University
    of California Press, 1998) and "Making a Spectacle of Empire: Indian
    Travellers in Fin-de-Siècle London," *History Workshop Journal* 42
    (1996): 127-46; Barbara Bush, *Imperialism, Race and Resistance:
    Africa and Britain 1919-1945;* Anna Snaith*, Modernist Voyages:
    Colonial Women Writers in London, 1890-1945, *David Dabydeen, John
    Gilmore, and Cecily Jones,*The Oxford Companion to Black British
    History *(Oxford: Oxford UP, 2007.

[^37]: We might have reasonably chosen a different approach, as Caryl
    Phillips did in *Extravagant Strangers* when he compiled an
    \"anthology of writing by British writers who are outsiders in the
    most clear-cut way[---]{.emdash}those not born in Britain\" in order
    to show that "English literature has, for at least 200 years, been
    shaped and influenced by outsiders." Caryl Phillips, ed. and intro.
    *Extravagant Strangers: A Literature of Belonging* (New York:
    Vintage, 1997), xiii. The anthology includes not only Kipling and
    Orwell but also Anglo-American T.S. Eliot, as well as black and
    Asian writers (but only one minority writer with a publication date
    between 1880 and 1940).

[^38]: Future research might encompass more white colonial authors, both
    from white settler colonies (Australia, New Zealand, Canada) and
    from British-colonized regions with a predominantly nonwhite
    population (India, etc.). Another potential area of inquiry would
    focus on Irish writers, who generally spent much of their formative
    years as one of the colonized majority, and "Anglo-Irish" writers,
    who often "returned" to the England of their ancestors and enjoyed
    more access to the resources of the capital.

[^39]: The Irish case highlights the difficulty of mediating between the
    racial discourses of the 1880s-1930s and those of the present day.
    In the late nineteenth century, the Irish were widely discussed in
    British writing as a race apart, one physiognomically distinct. But,
    while Irish anti-imperial activists met and traded information and
    strategies with anti-imperial activists from India and, to a lesser
    degree, from Africa and the Caribbean, their experiences of racial
    visibility differed significantly. Duse Mohamed Ali, a black
    Egyptian writer, publisher, and anti-imperial activist referenced
    this difference when, in 1920, he wrote in his London-based journal,
    *Africa and Orient Review*, "it behoves the coloured people of the
    world to show a solid front," since "\[a\]ll non-Europeans are
    labelled 'niggers' by Europeans." Duce Mohamed Ali, "The Final
    Word." *Africa and Orient Review* (May 1920): 45-46. The experiences
    of[---]{.emdash}and representations by[---]{.emdash}the Irish seem
    to call for separate treatment. We also have not identified Jewish
    writers to include among the "foreign"[---]{.emdash}though Jews
    (like the Irish) formed a large minority of London's population and
    encountered virulent discrimination[---]{.emdash}because their
    geographical and imperial history is significantly different from
    those of the colonial writers whose work is our focus here. These
    are obvious areas of future investigation.

[^40]: Matthew Wilkens, "The Geographic Imagination of Civil War Era
    American Fiction," *American Literary History*. 25.4 (2013):
    803-840.

[^41]: Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher Manning,
    "Incorporating Non-local Information into Information Extraction
    Systems by Gibbs Sampling." In *Proceedings of the 43nd Annual
    Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics* (*ACL
    2005*). New Brunswick: ACL, 2005. 363-370.

[^42]: Acquiring, standardizing, and harmonizing global historical
    geographic data at levels from entire nations to individual
    buildings is a task beyond the scope of our project. The most
    notable consequence of using present-day geographic definitions is
    the separation of once-colonized areas from the nations that ruled
    them between 1880 and 1940. This includes the Republic of Ireland,
    which is not counted in our data as a British domestic location.
    Historical toponyms ("Constantinople") are, in general, correctly
    resolved to their closest modern equivalents ("Istanbul").

[^43]: The average volume length across our corpora is 101,598 words.

[^44]: Wilkens, "The Geographic Imagination."

[^45]: We calculate 95% confidence intervals for all reported averages
    and p-values for all reported statistical comparisons in the code
    supplement to this article. Confidence intervals and p-values are
    included selectively inline. Unless otherwise indicated, we report
    no non-significant (*p* \> 0.05) statistical comparisons. In the
    present case, the values are 14.9-20.6% UK domestic locations in the
    Foreign corpus vs. 54.1-59.3% domestic locations in the London
    corpus (*p* = 1.4e-57), taking the occurrence-weighted ratio of
    domestic to international locations in each volume as an
    observation.

[^46]: Concerning home-nation biases in literary fiction, see also
    Matthew Wilkens, "The Perpetual Fifties of American Fiction,"
    *Neoliberalism and Contemporary Literary Culture*, eds. Mitchum
    Huehls and Rachel Greenwald-Smith (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP,
    2016, pp. 181-202).

[^47]: Mark Algee-Hewitt, Sarah Allison, Marissa Gemma, Ryan Heuser,
    Franco Moretti, and Hannah Walser. "Canon/Archive. Large-scale
    Dynamics in the Literary Field," *Pamphlets of the Stanford Literary
    Lab*, vol. 11. Stanford, CA: Stanford University, 2016.

[^48]: As a piece of trivia, we note that either Graham Greene or Ronald
    Firbank is the most geographically "typical" author in the Prominent
    corpus (depending on whether the average is calculated relative to
    the Prominent corpus alone or to all four corpora). Rebecca West and
    Aldous Huxley are also near the mean. For details of the method, see
    the linked visualization.

[^49]: It is not an accident that statistical significance is more
    difficult to achieve in the smaller corpora, especially when
    subdividing them by publication era.

[^50]: Ford Madox Ford, Henry James, Aldous Huxley, E.M. Forster, and
    H.G. Wells were all near the Prominent average in their rate of use
    of locations outside the UK. Joyce was notably
    high[---]{.emdash}Ireland being outside the UK[---]{.emdash}while
    Woolf was very low.

[^51]: Katherine Mansfield was near average in the fraction of London
    locations among all British locations in her work, as were Evelyn
    Waugh and Rebecca West. Woolf was well above average, Joyce well
    below. The case of Joyce emphasizes, again, both his imperfect fit
    as a British writer and the potential limitations, in any single
    case, of using London as a proxy for the urban. Further details of
    London usage across the corpora follow immediately below.

[^52]: Of course, the trend may have been different for other groups of
    foreign-born writers.

[^53]: Bloomsbury is an exemplary case of the fundamental need for
    interpretive interventions concerning toponyms. Mentions of the
    neighborhood and of the group alike are counted in our data, on the
    theory that the latter also represent meaningful reference to a
    specific place.

[^54]: The smaller arteries Bloomsbury Way and Theobalds Road also
    bordered the area (as described by Weinrob et al., *The London
    Encyclopaedia*, 78) but they are not in the top 100 of any of the
    lists.

[^55]: See Judith Walkowitz's book on Soho, *Nights Out: Life in
    Cosmopolitan London*, (New Haven: Yale UP, 2012) for more on both
    these aspects (especially pp. 22 and 232-52).

[^56]: Of London's many parks and gardens, Hyde Park was the most
    frequently mentioned green space across all the corpora. In the
    London corpus, the only green spaces to fall in the top 50 named
    London locations were Hyde Park and Greenwich. We exclude Greenwich
    from the collection of parks and gardens because its maritime
    history gave it a distinctive cultural function not shared by the
    others. Popular among tourists and London day-trippers alike,
    Greenwich was frequently mentioned across all corpora, with the
    least attention in the Prominent corpus.

[^57]: The prominence of parks in this corpus is an area for further
    exploration, for, as Kalliney discusses in the context of Woolf's
    *Mrs. Dalloway*, London's public parks, replete with imperial
    monuments, "were one of the primary spaces in which the English
    celebrated their colonial triumphs, articulated their imperial
    vision, and educated themselves about the gravity of their position
    as rulers." Peter J. Kalliney, *Cities of Affluence and Anger: A
    Literary Geography of Modern Englishness* (Charlottesville:
    University of Virginia Press, 2006), 86).

[^58]: For more on the dynamics of genre in the nineteenth and early
    twentieth centuries, considered from a similarly computational
    angle, see the [cluster of articles on that
    theme](http://culturalanalytics.org/2017/04/noveltm-special-issue-on-genre/)
    published in CA in late 2016.

[^59]: For the historical populations of London and of Great Britain,
    see Julie Jefferies, "The UK Population: Past, Present, and Future,"
    in *Focus on People and Migration* (London: Office of National
    Statistics, 2005) and "Population Growth in London 1939-2015,"
    (London: Greater London Authority, 2015). In 1901, these numbers
    were 6.5 million and 38.8 million, respectively, meaning London
    accounted for about 17% of total UK population (excluding what is
    now the Republic of Ireland but including present-day Northern
    Ireland) at the turn of the last century.

[^60]: Wilkens, "Geographic," "Perpetual Fifties."

[^61]: France would thus provide an interesting comparative case, given
    its close alignment with the UK in many of these respects.

[^62]: Ryan Heuser, Mark Algee-Hewitt, Annalise Lockhart, Eric Steiner,
    and Van Tran, "Mapping the Emotions of London in Fiction, 700-1900,"
    *Literary Mapping in the Digital Age*, edited by David Cooper,
    Christopher Donaldson, and Patricia Murrieta-Flores (London:
    Routledge, 2016), 25-46.

[^63]: See Elizabeth F. Evans, *Threshold Modernism*, (esp. ch. 5) for
    an extended exploration of this dynamic in a handful of works by
    colonial writers of color.

[^64]: Paul Gilroy, "A London Sumting Dis..." *Critical Quarterly* 41.3
    (1999): 57-69, 60.
