---
date: '05.23.16'
shorttitle: The Life Cycles of Genres
title: The Life Cycles of Genres
---

###### *Peer-Reviewed By: James English*

###### *Clusters: [Genre](http://66.147.244.186/~postfou1/ca/2016/05/genre/)*

###### *Journal ISSN: 2371-4549*

###### *Article DOI: [10.22148/16.005](https://doi.org/10.22148/16.005)*

###### *Dataverse DOI: [10.7910/DVN/XKQOQM](http://dx.doi.org/10.7910/DVN/XKQOQM)*

 

The concept of genre is as old as literary theory itself, but centuries
of debate haven't produced much consensus on the topic.[^1] Part of the
reason is that genre looks like a different thing at different points in
the life of a text. Scholars of rhetoric tend to focus on the patterns
of communicative action that produce memoranda or tragedies. [^2]
Sociologists are sometimes more interested in institutions that organize
reception. [^3] Literary scholars, for their part, have traditionally
been preoccupied with the patterning of the texts themselves. Of course,
all of these aspects of genre are connected. But it's not easy to
describe the connections.

Distant reading may seem to lend itself, inevitably, to literary
scholars' fixation on genre as an attribute of textual artifacts. But
the real value of quantitative methods could be that they allow scholars
to coordinate textual and social approaches to genre. This essay will
draw one tentative connection of that kind. It approaches genre
initially as a question about the history of reception [---]{.emdash}
gathering lists of titles that were grouped by particular readers or
institutions at particular historical moments. But it also looks beyond
those titles to the texts themselves. Contemporary practices of
statistical modeling allow us to put different groups of texts into
dialogue with each other, in order to discover, for instance, whether
competing definitions of the Gothic (created at different times and
embodied in entirely different lists of works) were nevertheless as
compatible as some critics claim.

The problem of historical comparison is a pressing one because literary
scholars haven't been able to reach much consensus about the life cycles
of novelistic genres. The Gothic, for instance, can be treated as a
category that lasts for 25 years or for 250. In *Graphs, Maps, Trees*,
Franco Moretti surveyed academic studies of genre, and concluded that
genres display "a rather regular changing of the guard . . . where half
a dozen genres quickly leave the scene, as many move in, and then remain
in place for twenty-five years or so."[^4] The Gothic novel of the late
eighteenth century gives way (say) to the Newgate novel around 1825,
then to the sensation novel in the (late) 1850s, and eventually to the
late-nineteenth-century "imperial Gothic" (e.g. *Dracula*), which
Moretti's chart treats as a phenomenon entirely different from the older
Gothic of monks and banditti. Moretti speculatively links the
twenty-five-year rhythm of this sequence to generational succession.

On the other hand, there are well-established traditions of reception
that suggest genres can sustain a coherent identity over much longer
timelines than this generational rhythm would allow. Fans of
contemporary mystery fiction often read Agatha Christie and Wilkie
Collins with equal pleasure. [^5] And critics, at least, enjoy framing
Stephen King as the inheritor of a Gothic tradition that stretches back
continuously through H. P. Lovecraft and Bram Stoker, all the way to
*The Castle of Otranto*. [^6]

We know that all these claims are valid as statements about reception.
Moretti is right that many academic studies of genre do cover
generation-sized periods. But it is also true that categories like
"detective fiction" have mattered continuously to readers for more than
a century. Textual analysis won't prove either claim wrong, but it may
help us understand how they're compatible. For instance, one obvious way
to reconcile conflicting accounts might be to say that Moretti is right
about the rhythms of genre in the century he discusses (the nineteenth)
[---]{.emdash} but wrong about the twentieth, because genres harden
there into durable marketing institutions. Moretti, however, has hinted
[^7] that even a long-lived twentieth-century genre like detective
fiction might be at bottom a sequence of generational stages (the
Holmesian "case," the closed circle of country-house suspects, the crime
thriller), linked by a relatively weak thread of filiation. [^8] The
beginning of a sequence like this might not even resemble the end.
Maurizio Ascari, for instance, argues that \"the term *detective
fiction* has been increasingly supplanted by *crime fiction,*\" and
glances skeptically at the old narrative that positioned "Poe as a
founding father and his 'tales of ratiocination' as the full-blown model
of the genre." [^9]

To decide between those accounts, we might ask whether short-lived
"generational" genres are actually more coherent than long-lived ones.
This is where textual evidence could start to be useful. Matthew Jockers
has shown that genres framed on a twenty-five- to thirty-year scale are
linguistically coherent phenomena in the nineteenth century. A
statistical model trained on examples of silver-fork or sensation
fiction can identify other examples of the same genre with reasonably
high accuracy. [^10]

It would be interesting to discover whether longer-term phenomena like
detective fiction or science fiction have more or less linguistic
coherence than these thirty-year categories. Intuitively, one might
expect the boundaries of a longer-lived category to be blurrier; it's
hard to believe that *The Moonstone* (1868) and *The Big Sleep* (1939)
have much in common on a textual level. If it does turn out to be easier
to recognize "sensation novels" than "detective fiction," we'll have
some evidence that Moretti was right about the underlying generational
logic of genre. Evidence of this kind wouldn't rule out the possibility
of longer-term continuity: we don't know, after all, that books need to
resemble each other textually in order to belong to the same genre. But
if we did find that textual coherence was strongest over short
timespans, we might conclude at least that generation-sized genres have
a particular *kind* of coherence absent from longer-lived ones.

On the other hand, there are different kinds of historical trajectories
we could just as reasonably expect to find. For instance, scholars have
spent a great deal of energy tracing the gradual standardization of
genre conventions in the early twentieth century, pointing to
genre-specific pulps and critical pronouncements like Ronald Knox's
so-called "Decalogue" (1929) of rules for detective stories as moments
of genre consolidation. [^11] For some genres the process is thought to
have taken even longer. Gary K. Wolfe suggests that "the science fiction
novel persistently failed to cohere as a genre" until the 1940s. [^12]
If this account of literary history is correct, we wouldn't expect to
find a succession of distinct generational phases, but a steady
hardening of boundaries, producing genres that are much more clearly
distinct by the middle of the twentieth century than at its outset.
That's the story I expected to find when I began this project.

To investigate these questions, I've gathered lists of titles assigned
to a genre in eighteen different sites of reception. Some of these lists
reflect recent scholarly opinion, some were defined by writers or
editors earlier in the twentieth century, others reflect the practices
of many different library catalogers (see Appendix A). Although each
list defines its object slightly differently, they can be loosely
arranged around three categories: detective fiction (or "mystery" or
"crime fiction"), science fiction (also defined in a variety of ways),
and the Gothic. (It is debatable whether the Gothic, writ large, is a
genre at all [---]{.emdash} but that's what makes it an interesting
case.) I also collected texts corresponding to these titles, relying on
the Chicago Text Lab and HathiTrust Digital Library as sources. [^13] By
comparing groups of texts associated with different sites of reception
and segments of the timeline, we can ask exactly how stable different
categories have been.

The story that emerged from this experiment doesn't line up very neatly
with either of the alternative accounts I just gave: generational
succession or gradual consolidation. I see little evidence of the
generational waves Moretti's theory would predict. In fact, it's not
even the case that books in a chronologically-focused genre (like "the
sensation novel, 1860-1880") necessarily resemble each other more
closely than books spread out across a long timeline. Detective fiction
and science fiction display a textual coherence that is at least as
strong as Moretti's shorter-lived genres, and they sustain it over very
long periods (160 or perhaps even 200 years). So I think we can set
aside the (productive) conjecture that twenty-five-year generational
cycles have special importance for the study of genre.

But I also haven't found much evidence for the story of gradual
consolidation that I expected to reveal. Although it is clearly true
that the publishing institutions governing genre developed gradually, it
appears I was wrong to expect that the textual differences between
genres would develop in the same gradual way. In the case of detective
fiction, for instance, the textual differences that distinguish
twentieth-century stories of detection from other genres can be traced
back very clearly as far as "The Murders in the Rue Morgue"
[---]{.emdash} and not much farther. Detective fiction did spread
gradually, in the sense that Poe and Vidocq were initially isolated
figures, without a supporting cast of imitators, let alone
genre-specific magazines and book clubs. But textual patterns don't have
to develop as gradually as institutions do. Poe's stories already
display many of the same features that distinguish twentieth-century
crime fiction from other genres.

 

### **Predictive modeling** {#predictive-modeling style="text-align: center;"}

Computers enter this essay largely to address a tangle of problems
created by recent genre theory. If we could define genres once and for
all by locating a single formal principle that unified them, our
critical task would be much simpler. We could say that science fiction
is Darko Suvin's "literature of cognitive estrangement," [^14] and be
done. Unfortunately, readers rarely agree about the defining
characteristic of a genre; different communities may value different
things about the same works. Genre theorists increasingly suspect that
genres are "family resemblances," constituted by a host of overlapping
features. [^15] Moreover, genres are historical constructions: the
features that matter may change. [^16]

In short, it increasingly seems that a genre is not a single object we
can observe and describe. It may instead be a mutable set of relations
between works that are linked in different ways, and resemble each other
to different degrees. A problem like this requires a methodology that is
cautious about ontological assumptions, and patient with details.
Predictive modeling fits the bill. Leo Breiman has emphasized that
predictive models depart from familiar statistical methods (and I would
add, from traditional critical procedures) by bracketing the quest to
identify underlying factors that really cause and explain the phenomenon
being studied. [^17] Where genre is concerned, this means that our goal
is no longer to define a genre, but to find a model that can reproduce
the judgments made by particular historical observers. For instance,
adjectives of size ("huge," "gigantic," but also "tiny") are among the
most reliable textual clues that a book will be called science fiction.
Few people would *define* science fiction as a meditation on size, but
it turns out that works categorized as science fiction (by certain
sources) do spend a lot of time talking about the topic. Add clues from
a few hundred more words, and you may have a statistical model that can
identify other works these same sources called "science fiction," even
if the underlying definition of the genre remains difficult to
articulate (or never existed).

Hoyt Long and Richard Jean So (2016) have recently used predictive
models in a similar way to recognize "latent, nonexplicit traces" of a
haiku style in English poetry. [^18] The point of machine learning in
projects like these is not primarily to enlarge the number of books we
consider, but to register and compare blurry family resemblances that
might be difficult to define verbally without reductiveness. To put it
more pointedly: computational methods make contemporary genre theory
useful. We can dispense with fixed definitions, and base the study of
genre only on the shifting practices of particular historical actors­­­
- but still produce models of genre substantive enough to compare and
contrast.

Since no causal power is ascribed to variables in a predictive model,
the choice of features is not all-important. I'll use words as clues in
the discussion that follows, but I don't mean to imply that genre is a
linguistic phenomenon. It isn't. Genre is a broadly social phenomenon;
words just happen to be convenient predictive clues, allowing us to
trace the implicit similarities and dissimilarities between different
practices of selection. We could use other features of the text if we
preferred. Some researchers have used punctuation marks or character
networks to predict genre; when I was trying to locate genres in a
collection of 850,000 volumes, I engineered features related to page
format. [^19] But our goal in that project was to maximize the sheer
predictive accuracy of the model, since we were dragging a net through
unknown waters, and wanted simply to catch as much as possible.

This project's goal is different. I am working with labeled examples,
not trying to catch unlabeled ones. If all the models described here
could be improved by 1%, it would make no difference to the argument.
What matter are the *relative* strengths of the boundaries between
different groups of texts. So I have made little effort to optimize
accuracy; instead I've maximized legibility and consistency. All the
models described here use the same feature set, which is created simply
by taking the top 10,000 words (by document frequency) in the collection
as a whole, across all genres and works without a determinate genre. (We
could have used the top 5,000 or 3,000 words; accuracy would vary by
about 1%.) For a learning algorithm, I use L2-regularized logistic
regression, a well-known algorithm that provides relatively simple
estimates of feature importance. [^20]

This cavalier attitude toward mere accuracy does have a limit. If
statistical models couldn't predict genre at all, they obviously
wouldn't provide useful evidence. But that's not a problem we will
encounter. The models discussed in this article will make predictions
that are 70% to 93% accurate, clustering toward the upper end of that
range. And although we'll characterize a genre predicted with only 76%
accuracy as a "relatively loose" grouping, compared to one that can be
recognized 91% of the time, the truth is that all of these numbers
reveal substantial similarities across a group of texts: we're well
above ordinary social-scientific thresholds of effect size. [^21]

Although I have used the same method for every genre, I cannot
guarantee, in advance, that the method is equally suited to all genres.
If a genre was particularly hard to pin down to a vocabulary, it might
be hard to classify using a bag-of-words model. Science fiction, for
instance, seems likely to pose special problems, since submarines
eventually stop counting as futuristic, and are replaced by new wonders
of tomorrow. In practice, we won't encounter many problems of that kind.
Lexical models have no difficulty finding common formal elements that
link thematically diverse works. Generally they report similarities
between texts that closely track critical intuition. But they can also
diverge from critics' expectations (which are not, after all, in
agreement). Positive divergences are easy to interpret: continuities
discovered by a lexical model can immediately rule out the thesis that
two sites of reception had nothing in common. Our confidence in negative
divergences will have to build up more slowly, since we cannot *a
priori* rule out similarities that elude the model. These methods will
have to recognize the coherence of many different genres before we start
to trust that the groupings they see as looser are truly less coherent
on a textual level.

If you give a learning algorithm enough variables, it can in effect
"memorize" a dataset and make unrealistically accurate predictions about
the examples it has already seen. So a model with more than a few
variables can only really be tested on held-out examples. The models in
this paper are always evaluated by cross-validation on held-out authors.
[^22]  In other words, we show the model all the authors (except one) in
a set, and then test it on the unseen author's works. The process is
repeated until all the authors have been covered and we can calculate
accuracy on the whole set.

 

### **Genres occupy a space with more than three dimensions** {#genres-occupy-a-space-with-more-than-three-dimensions style="text-align: center;"}

The word "genre" may evoke a mental image of a map that neatly
partitions the landscape so that each work is located in one and only
one region. But our actual practices of categorizing fiction haven't
created that kind of map, nor have I attempted to produce one here. A
novel like *The Woman in White* (1859) is assigned by some observers to
the Gothic, and by others to the sensation novel. In my metadata it
bears tags associated with both claims. Other novels aren't associated
with any determinate genre: in reality the majority of
nineteenth-century works have never been categorized very specifically.
So a work of fiction can belong to many genres, or to none at all.
Instead of attempting to discover a single partitioning scheme that
organizes this whole space, I run a series of separate comparisons,
always assembling works tagged with a particular group of genre claims,
and comparing that set of works to a contrast set of equal size. Usually
the contrast set is selected randomly from a digital library (except
inasmuch as it excludes tags in the positive set), and is distributed
across time in a way that matches the distribution of the positive set
as closely as possible.

If there's no meaningful difference between the two categories being
compared, you would expect the model to make predictions that aren't
much better than random guessing (50% accurate). And it makes sense to
start by running that test as a sanity check. I randomly assigned all
the authors used in this article to two "teams" and randomly selected
140 volumes from each "team," then tried to train a model to distinguish
the two groups. The results of forty trials are plotted (in gray) in
figure 1. As you can see, average accuracy is a little lower (45%) than
it would be if we had just guessed randomly. When a classification
algorithm tries to find differences between two randomly selected
groups, it is still able to discover a faint pattern, but an accidental
pattern will have no meaningful relation to held-out examples, and a
useless rule of that kind can easily give predictions a bias that is
worse than a guess. So there is very little danger that this algorithm
will seem to discern a difference between two groups where none exists.

::: {#attachment_346 .image style="max-width: 586px"}
![](http://66.147.244.186/~postfou1/ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/Figure1Histogram-e1463436724230.jpeg)

Figure 1. Histogram plotting the accuracy of 40 models for three
different putative "genres." For each model, 140 positive instances were
selected randomly from a longer list. The list of "detective fiction"
was constructed using methods to be explained in the next section.
:::

But there is another kind of baseline test we should run. What happens
if we mix all the works tagged with *any* genre we're studying into a
single ghastly stew and compare that superset to all the randomly
selected works that weren't associated with any genre tag? As you can
see in figure 1, the model is often able to recognize volumes that come
from our "genre stew," even though this combination of Gothic, Newgate,
sensation, detective, and science fiction probably doesn't constitute
anything we would ordinarily call a coherent genre. The model's
predictions are correct, on average, 78% of the time. [^23] Glancing at
a few of the words that predict membership in this superset of genres,
it's not hard to see what's happening. The individual genres involved
here are not entirely dissimilar. They share sensational subject matter,
and a number of props or plot devices that are more likely to occur in
any of them than in a randomly selected work. "Murder," "ghastly,"
"lock," "key," "theory," and "laboratory" are near the top of the list
of predictive words, for instance. The words that typify the random
contrast set are harder to characterize, but (by comparison at least)
evoke aspects of ordinary domestic life ("married," "blame," "mornings,"
"proud," "friends," "afternoons"). Perhaps this picture would change if
we were studying genres like the Bildungsroman. But in the dataset I
have assembled for this article, there are broad differences between
genre fiction as such and a randomly selected, relatively quotidian
background.

If we wanted to understand this difference in depth, we would need to do
more than glance at the top and bottom of a list of ten thousand
features. A semantic scaffolding could no doubt be built to support and
particularize my casual inferences about "sensational" and "quotidian"
subject-matter. But that would take up space and time, and it is not the
primary point of this essay to offer new descriptions of the content of
every genre it discusses. So, while full lists of features are available
in an online code and data supplement, [^24] my descriptions will remain
brief, only mentioning a few predictive words from each model to convey
a general flavor of the contrast involved.

Instead of redefining genres, this essay is fundamentally making an
argument about their varying lifespans and degrees of textual coherence.
For that purpose, what matters is less how we characterize diction, and
more how we interpret degrees of similarity between groups of texts. It
is especially important to understand that genres can occupy a space of
similarity with more than three dimensions. Things that are close to
each other along one axis can still be far apart in other ways. For
instance, we have seen that detective fiction, science fiction, and
various other genres, mixed together, can be distinguished from randomly
selected works 78% of the time. It might be tempting to infer that
detective fiction and science fiction are "basically continuous" or "78%
similar"; we could start to build a narrative that made Sherlock Holmes'
training in chemistry a crucial, overlooked connection between them. But
in fact, the differences *between* these genres are even stronger than
their collective difference from a randomly selected background. If you
train a model to distinguish detective fiction from science fiction, or
from the Gothic, it will be right (in both cases) more than 93% of the
time.

Predictive models are rather like human beings: they can always find
some ways that that two sets of works are similar, and other ways that
they differ. If we want to know whether detective fiction and science
fiction can usefully be lumped together, no single two-sided comparison
will answer the question. Instead we might look at the relative strength
of multiple comparisons. We see in figure 1, for instance, that
detective fiction on its own is significantly easier to distinguish from
a random contrast set than our "genre stew"; this might already suggest
that it's a more tightly knit category. Alternatively, we might ask a
three-sided question that allows us to situate two genres in the same
frame of reference. Do detective stories, for instance, differ from
other works of fiction *in the same way* that science fiction differs?
Predictive models are good at extrapolating from one set of evidence to
another. So you can train a model on the contrast between detective
fiction and a randomly selected background, and then ask the same model
to distinguish works of science fiction from the same background. As we
might expect, the model fails utterly: it's right less than half of the
time. Although these two genres have a few things in common (theories
and laboratories, for instance), *most* of the features that distinguish
them from the background are different. When I need to decide whether
two models of genre are similar, in the pages that follow, this is the
test I'll place most trust in. It certainly tells us that our ghastly
"genre stew" can be separated out into detective fiction and science
fiction. The next question is whether "detective fiction" itself
similarly breaks up into subgenres, or groups of works assembled at
particular sites of reception, that differ more than they resemble each
other.

 

### **Detective fiction** {#detective-fiction style="text-align: center;"}

In assembling genre lists for the second half of the twentieth century,
I have used mostly Library of Congress genre/form headings. These tags
were applied to volumes by individual librarians, and reflect tacit
assumptions about genre held by many different people. In the case of
detective fiction, I've lumped together several different headings,
including "Mystery fiction," "Detective and mystery fiction," and the
subject heading "Detectives" (when applied to works that are mostly
fiction). As we go back before 1940, these tags become very sparse,
because we're looking at works that were originally cataloged before the
Library of Congress system assumed its present form. Only a few of these
works have been recataloged in the modern verbose way. So for the
earlier period we mostly have to rely on bibliographies and critical
studies.

There are many enormous bibliographies of detective fiction; the
challenge is to find one small enough to transcribe. For pre-war
detective fiction, I have relied mostly on the catalog of an exhibition
organized at Indiana University Library in 1973, covering "The First
Hundred Years of Detective Fiction, 1841-1941." This exhibition lists
collections of short stories (and a few individual stories) along with
novels. It also lists works in translation. I have been similarly
inclusive throughout this essay. A writer like Jules Verne did an
enormous amount to shape genre beyond France, so we would lose a lot by
excluding translations. I doubt, moreover, that there's anything
untranslatable about the patterns at issue here: Verne will turn out to
be an extremely typical figure within science fiction, even in
translation.

It is of course possible that a single exhibition catalog of detective
fiction (limited to volumes before 1941) will create a picture of the
genre that diverges substantially from assorted volumes 1829-1989
cataloged by many different hands. But that's exactly the kind of
question statistical modeling allows us to test. Modeling just the 88
volumes from the Indiana exhibition (that I was able to obtain
digitally), we have a rather high level of accuracy, 90.9%. The 177
volumes that have Library of Congress genre tags are more of a mixed
bag, and can only be recognized 87.3% of the time. If we combine both
sets, we have 249 volumes (since 16 were in both groups) that can be
recognized with 91.0% accuracy. So mixing groups selected in different
ways doesn't reduce accuracy; it's a compromise that "levels upward."

But as I've mentioned before, algorithmic models can be very good at
finding common elements in a group of works. The real test of similarity
between two categories (A and B) is to ask a model trained on a contrast
between A and C to also distinguish B from C. For instance, when we ask
a model trained on the Library of Congress detective fiction to
distinguish the Indiana exhibition from a similar random background, it
is still 89.3% accurate. That's the real confirmation that we're looking
at largely congruent definitions of detective fiction.

The probabilistic nature of the model we're using makes it easy to see
which examples of detective fiction are particularly typical or
particularly hard to classify. We can spread volumes out along a y-axis
that characterizes the model's degree of confidence that they belong to
the "detective fiction" set. In figure 2 I've done that with all 249
volumes that were either tagged by individual librarians or included in
the Indiana exhibition.

::: {#attachment_47 .image style="max-width: 650px"}
![](http://66.147.244.186/~postfou1/ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Figure2Detective.jpeg)

Figure 2. Predicted probabilities of coming from the "detective fiction"
set; 91.0% accuracy overall.
:::

One very striking detail is the position occupied by Edgar Allan Poe's
three stories of detection from the early 1840s. They seem to be
exemplary models of the genre, not just in their own period, but
according to standards that organize the whole timeline from 1829 to
1989. Although Poe's durable status as a template is consistent with one
influential genealogy of the detective story, [^25] it is not something
all critics have agreed about. Moretti, for instance, remarks that
detective fiction achieved its modern form only around 1890, [^26] and
Ascari outright denies that Poe is still relevant to crime fiction.
[^27] Nor is this continuity something I actually expected to see in a
statistical model. In fact, I expected that the boundaries of detective
fiction would tend to get blurry as we proceeded back before Conan
Doyle, into a period where stories of detection were often fused with
other genres, like the sensation novel. Perhaps we see a bit more
blurriness in the 1860s and 1870s than in the middle of the twentieth
century. (And there are some flat-out errors in the 1830s: catalogers
who tried to stretch "detective fiction" to cover a novel from 1832 end
up breaking the concept.) But the early works critics tend to identify
as prototypes ("Murders in the Rue Morgue," *The Moonstone*) remain
exemplary in this model. This evidence doesn't necessarily establish an
"origin," or prove that particular writers defined the genre. It might
prove only that the late-twentieth-century critics who identified
prototypes of detective fiction did a good job of extrapolating backward
from practice in their own era.

But this evidence can show that the continuity of detective fiction is
more than a series of genealogical links between disparate forms. For
instance, suppose we lump the Indiana exhibition and Library of Congress
tags into a single group of 249 texts, but divide the group
chronologically at the year 1930. How much does the definition of
detective fiction change between the two halves? If we model the 130
volumes after 1930, we get 88.5% accuracy. But if we train a model on
the 119 volumes up to 1930, and use that model to make predictions about
works after 1930, the model will still be 86.9% accurate. The verbal
differences that mark detective fiction up to 1930 largely continue to
characterize it afterward. This is not to say that the genre stopped
changing. The main vogue of the hard-boiled detective, for instance, is
still to come in 1930; that's certainly an important change. But the
nature of the *difference* between detective fiction and the rest of the
literary field didn't dramatically alter. The boundaries of the genre
are stable. (It may be worth noting that this remains true even though
the random contrast set before 1930 comes mostly from HathiTrust, and
after 1930 mostly from the Chicago Text Lab. These collections were
selected differently, but the differences are not large enough to
interfere with the genre signal.)

Our model provides evidence of continuity strong enough to pose real
problems for a prevailing strain of nominalism in genre theory. The
(valid) premise that genres needn't be unified by a clear definition or
pre-existing essence is often taken a step or two further, to suggest
that genres are unified only by a genealogical thread [---]{.emdash}
that past and future are linked only as a continuous process of
negotiation among "communities of practice." [^28] Maurizio Ascari
criticizes Moretti's "positivistic" approach to detective fiction by
reminding us that "in the course of the twentieth century, detective
fiction deeply changed"; indeed, "all literary genres change
unceasingly."[^29] Mark Bould and Sherryl Vint (2009) argue that "genres
are never, as frequently perceived, objects which already exist in the
world and which are subsequently studied by genre critics, but fluid and
tenuous constructions made by the interaction of various claims and
practices" [---]{.emdash} or putting it even more boldly, \"there is no
such *thing* as science fiction.\"[^30] When I began this study, I might
have embraced some of these claims; at any rate, skepticism about the
stability of genre seemed preferable to endless definitional argument.
But predictive models make a middle path possible. We can start
cautiously, with contingent boundaries drawn by specific historical
actors, and then ask, empirically, how far their implicit selection
criteria agree or diverge. In the case of detective fiction, lists of
texts organized by different hands, at different times, are extremely
compatible. Moreover, a model of the genre's past does an excellent job
of predicting its future.

But what exactly *is* the definition of "detective fiction" operative
here? It is not, for the most part, a shocking one. "Police," "murder,"
"investigation," and "crime" define the thematic premise of the genre.
"Suspicion," "evidence," "prove," "theory," "coincidence" (and, to give
a subtler example, "whoever") foreground the mechanics of doubt and
demonstration that drive the plot. If we look a little deeper into the
model, there are less obvious details. For instance, architecture and
domestic furnishing also provide clues: "door," "room," "window," "desk"
are all highly predictive words. At the opposite end of the scale, words
that describe childhood and education ("born," "grew," "taught,"
"children," "teacher") strongly predict that a volume is not detective
fiction. Perhaps the genre's focus on a particular mysterious incident
(or its tendency to take short-story form) encourage a contraction of
biographical horizons.

In any event, detective fiction turns out to be textually coherent
across a period of 160 years (1829-1989). But we haven't really tested a
model until we find out where it breaks. For instance, suppose instead
of foregrounding the figure of the detective, we foregrounded the
criminal milieu? The boundary between "detective fiction" and "crime
fiction" can be blurry; it is troubled by the novels of Patricia
Highsmith and by Arthur J. Raffles, gentleman thief. What if we added a
couple of novels that are tagged as "crime fiction" but not detective
fiction in the twentieth century, and also a group of Newgate novels
from 1820-40? One classic study of detective fiction begins with *Oliver
Twist,* after all. [^31] Sensation novels have also been identified as
precursors of detective fiction; [^32] *The Moonstone* was already
included in the Indiana exhibition, but we might try adding other
sensation novels to see whether they too would fit in this category.

::: {#attachment_48 .image style="max-width: 650px"}
![](http://66.147.244.186/~postfou1/ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Figure3Crime.jpeg)

Figure 3. A model trained only on the detective and random examples
makes predictions about three other categories.
:::

There are places where our model can easily include other categories and
places where it refuses to stretch. In figure 3, I've trained a model on
the same group of 249 detective novels used in figure 2, but have also
allowed it to make predictions about other sets of works not included in
the training set. Recent novels that were tagged as "crime fiction" (for
instance Patricia Highsmith, *A Dog's Ransom*) turn out to be very
compatible with our existing model of detective fiction. But
nineteenth-century sensation novels and Newgate novels won't fit into
the same textual box. This doesn't prove that it was wrong for D. A.
Miller to discuss Newgate and detective novels together in *The Novel
and the Police*. There is no law, after all, declaring that
literary-historical concepts have to be recognizable at the level of
diction. If we want to define a genre called crime fiction that includes
the Newgate novel, we can do it, and the concept may well be
illuminating. But we will be talking about a genre of a slightly
different kind [---]{.emdash} one that lacks the level of linguistic
homogeneity connecting E. A. Poe to Agatha Christie and Patricia
Highsmith. The point of this inquiry, in other words, is not to decide
what can or cannot be called a "genre," but to help us differentiate the
various kinds of patterns literary historians have used the word to
designate.

 

### **The Gothic** {#the-gothic style="text-align: center;"}

The history of Gothic fiction creates, appropriately, a mystery about
ancestral figures that haunt their descendants only as ambiguous traces.
Critics seem fairly confident that the Gothic novel was a coherent
phenomenon in Britain from 1760 to perhaps 1830. But as we move further
into the nineteenth century, it becomes less and less clear whether the
Gothic remains a continuous tradition. I have already mentioned that
Franco Moretti divides the nineteenth-century Gothic into two genres at
opposite ends of the century. In twentieth-century America, "Southern
Gothic" is often treated as a distinct literary phenomenon. There's also
a strong argument to be made for a specifically female Gothic tradition
that might run back through DuMaurier's *Rebecca* to Brontë's *Jane
Eyre*. [^33] On the other hand, there are critical traditions that
insist on the continuity of all these things, and that indeed stretch
the Gothic to encompass the contemporary publishing category of
"horror." [^34] You can find anthologies of Gothic fiction for sale that
span the whole distance from *Otranto* to Anne Rice, so as a practical
matter of reception, there must be *some* sort of continuity out there,
whether we want to call it a genre, a mode, a fandom, or a loose set of
themes.

Since we have good reasons to wonder whether "the Gothic" writ large is
a strongly unified tradition, it was particularly important in this case
to compare different sources of testimony. Before 1840 I relied heavily
on the Stanford Literary Lab's list of Gothic fiction; [^35] after 1940
I relied increasingly on the Library of Congress genre tags associated
with "horror" or the "ghost story." But I also collected a set of works
mentioned in *The Gothic,* a Blackwell guide edited by David Punter and
Glennis Byron (2004), which tries to trace a Gothic tradition all the
way from Horace Walpole to Brett Easton Ellis, linked through a
surprising range of intermediary figures that includes Charlotte Brontë,
Henry James, and H. P. Lovecraft.

None of these lists display the kind of coherence we found in detective
fiction. The sample that could be predicted most accurately was the
smallest: the 21 works (1791-1834) identified as Gothic by the Stanford
Literary Lab could be recognized 81.0% of the time. The hardest sample
to model was the superset that combines them all: 165 volumes that can
only be recognized with 77.0% accuracy. The numeric contrast here
between 81% and 77% is a little more dramatic than it sounds, because
these aren't apples-to-apples comparisons. Accuracy would ordinarily
increase with the size of the set being modeled. To convey a sense of
that increase, I've plotted curves that indicate the mean accuracy for
other genres at various sample sizes.

::: {#attachment_49 .image style="max-width: 650px"}
![](http://66.147.244.186/~postfou1/ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Figure4Gothic.jpeg)

Figure 4. Various samples of Gothic fiction, plotted relative to curves
that indicate the typical range of accuracies for other genres at
different sample sizes.
:::

The Stanford subset of Gothic novels is textually as coherent as a
similarly sized sample of detective fiction. But century-spanning
samples of Gothic fiction perform remarkably poorly for their size;
they're no easier to model than a mixture of all genres included in the
project. This suggests that the Romantic-era Gothic novel has very
little language in common with twentieth-century traditions of horror or
supernatural fiction. We can confirm this by training a model on one of
these periods and applying it to the other; it does little better than
random guessing.

I don't expect this to surprise many readers. Very few critics claim
that the Gothic, writ large, is a genre as tightly knit as the sensation
novel or detective fiction. Even in the process of constructing a
two-century anthology, Punter and Byron (2004) acknowledge the
possibility that "there are very few actual literary texts which are
'Gothic'; that the Gothic is more do to with particular moments, tropes,
repeated motifs that are found scattered ... through modern western
literary tradition." [^36] The difficulty of modeling Gothic fiction on
a two-century scale is partly a confirmation of this suspicion, but also
perhaps a sanity check for our method. (A method that didn't recognize
hard cases would be hard to trust about others.) It may also remind us
that there are continuities a model based on diction fails to register.
Critics seem to agree that the spectrum of things called Gothic
constitutes, if not quite a genre, at least a mode or a loose thematic
similarity. Yet our model doesn't see that spectrum as unified more
strongly than works selected at random from an assortment of popular
genres.

One obvious explanation might be that the concept of Gothic simply
covers too much space on the timeline; language just changes too much in
two centuries for genre to be modeled linguistically across that
distance. But we have other examples where this doesn't seem to pose a
problem [---]{.emdash} for instance, figure 4 reminds us that detective
fiction holds together quite well from 1829 to 1989. Indeed, as we see
in figure 5, there's not much evidence that chronologically focused
genres are generally more coherent, linguistically, than our 160-year
sample of detective fiction.

::: {#attachment_50 .image style="max-width: 650px"}
![](http://66.147.244.186/~postfou1/ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Figure5Generational.jpeg)

Figure 5. Several genres of roughly generational size, plotted relative
to a curve that indicates the range of accuracy for a random sample of
detective fiction drawn from 1829-1989. The shaded ribbon is a
predictive band that covers 90% of models for a random sample of
detective fiction.
:::

If you downsample detective fiction to get a training set the same size
as a sample of Gothic, Newgate, or sensation fiction, then detective
fiction appears just as coherent as those chronologically-focused
genres, even though its volumes are drawn from a period lasting more
than 150 years. This is the decisive evidence against Franco Moretti's
conjecture that genres have generational lifespans. Genres that survive
much longer than a generation seem to be united by textual similarities
just as strong as those uniting shorter-lived ones. Since it's hard to
prove that these models are capturing all possible similarities between
texts, we might express this cautiously: if there is any generational
rhythm in the history of genre, this method has not detected it
[---]{.emdash} although it seems able to detect all of the patterns
scholars call genres.

Is it possible to make detective fiction even more coherent by focusing
on a narrower generational span? Not really. If you break the long arc
of detective fiction into 25-year spans of time, and model them
separately, you get an average accuracy that is very comparable to the
accuracy of a similarly sized sample from the whole timeline. You can,
however, get slightly higher accuracy from at least one critically
recognized subgenre: the hardboiled detective novel. Even a small sample
of ten hardboiled novels from 1929-1970 can be picked out of a lineup
with 85% accuracy. Perhaps the stylistic homogeneity of these novels has
something to do with their social homogeneity. Dorothy Hughes is the
only woman in our mid-century sample of hardboiled writers. In fact, the
distinction between the hardboiled and country-house traditions was not
a generational divide at all; it was organized more by gender and by the
Atlantic Ocean. But it is also not an insuperable divide. A model
trained on the country-house tradition can spot hardboiled detectives
just as accurately (85%) as a model trained on the hardboiled examples
themselves.  So there is little reason to conclude that these subgenres
became independent of the larger concept "detective fiction."

 

### **Science fiction** {#science-fiction style="text-align: center;"}

I've argued that genre concepts that persist for more than a century can
be just as coherent, linguistically, as those that persist for a few
decades. But so far detective fiction is my only example, and there are
reasons to suspect that the detective/mystery/crime genre might rely on
an unusually stable set of premises. There's always a crime; there's
always a detective; there's always an investigation. Science fiction
would appear to pose a more challenging problem, because the premises of
the genre are inherently mutable. The Vernian prototypes of the genre
often describe conveyances like balloons and submarines that are no
longer science-fictional. Recent examples of the genre depend on
technologies of a very different sort. It's not immediately obvious that
Gibson's *Neuromancer*, Wells' *Time Machine*, and Mary Shelley's
*Frankenstein* would share much common vocabulary. Many skeptical
theories of genre have taken shape specifically around the mutability of
science fiction [---]{.emdash} as the title "There Is No Such Thing As
Science Fiction" reminds us. [^37] In short, it is not intuitively clear
whether we should expect science fiction to hold together over long
timelines, like detective fiction, or fall apart like the Gothic.

Since there are different stories about the early history of science
fiction, I drew on several different sources for that period. *The
Anatomy of Wonder* is a well-known bibliography with chapters on the
early history of science fiction contributed by Brian Stableford, a
writer of science fiction himself. Stableford's history of the genre
strongly emphasizes H. G. Wells and the future-war tradition, but is
somewhat more reticent about other predecessor figures, like Mary
Shelley and Jane Loudon. (Like many historians of science fiction,
Stableford tends to define the genre through its scientific content, and
he can be skeptical about works where that content seems lacking.) To
get a fuller representation of women in the genre I relied on a
bibliography of women in early science fiction constructed by Mary Mark
Ockerbloom at the University of Pennsylvania library. In spite of their
different conceptual emphases, these sources construct lists of texts
that can be modeled, linguistically, in very similar ways. A model of
either one, combined with twentieth-century texts labeled by librarians,
can predict the other with 90% or better accuracy.

When all these bibliographic sources are folded together, we have a list
of 196 volumes stretching from 1771 to 1989 that can be modeled with
88.3% accuracy. The boundaries of the genre are a little less clear than
detective fiction, but it certainly has a coherence more akin to that
genre than to the Gothic. (Accuracy remains about three times closer to
detective fiction even if we downsample all the genres to have the same
number of volumes.)

::: {#attachment_51 .image style="max-width: 650px"}
![](http://66.147.244.186/~postfou1/ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Figure6SF.jpeg)

Figure 6. Science fiction 1771-1989, classified with 88.3% accuracy.
:::

How is it possible to model such a long and protean history just by
counting words? *Frankenstein* is a Romantic-era text that doesn't even
invoke "science" terribly often. But it turns out that there are verbal
traces that do persist across 170 years. Invocations of scale ("vast,"
"far," "larger") are very characteristic of science fiction, as are
large numbers ("thousands"). Self-conscious references to the "earth"
and to things that are "human" tend to accompany "creatures" from which
humanity may be distinguished, and the pronoun "its" is common, since we
often confront actors who lack an easily recognized human gender. This
is not by any means an exhaustive description of the genre
[---]{.emdash} just a taste of the model.

One visually salient thing about figure 6 is a slight downward slope in
the red triangles after 1950. It's far from clear that this is a
statistically significant trend, but it does interestingly echo a
similar trend in detective fiction (fig. 3). In both cases, it appears
that the postwar volumes gradually lose the strongly marked generic
distinctness that typified the 1930s and 40s. There are reasons to be
cautious here; it's a subtle trend, and it could be shaped by
vicissitudes of selection, since mid-century volumes are sometimes more
likely to be available digitally if they possess a genre-specific fan
audience. It's also conceivable that works in the middle of a timeline
might tend to fit a model better than works on either edge (although
that pattern hasn't been evident in previous research using this
method). But, if the trend is real, it might echo Gary Wolfe's
hypothesis that the boundaries of fantastic genres have recently become
unstable. "Fantasy is evaporating ... growing more diffuse, leaching out
into the air around it, imparting a strange smell to the literary
atmosphere." [^38] There are however slight differences from Wolfe's
thesis, and from related claims about postmodern "magic realism." The
shift visible in these models seems to have made genre fiction more like
the rest of the literary field. The converse trend [---]{.emdash} a
playful borrowing of genre tropes by mainstream literary authors
[---]{.emdash} isn't particularly visible yet. Perhaps it would become
visible after 1990.

Another thing we might expect that doesn't appear in this model is the
gradual consolidation of genre conventions that science fiction scholars
spend so much time tracing. Historians of this genre are rarely as
willing to give Verne and Shelley quite as much credit as historians of
detective fiction give Poe. The narrative premise of much historiography
is that science fiction was an inchoate phenomenon (scattered across
utopias, planetary romances, etc) until given a new shape and direction
by particular pulp magazines and anthologies between 1925 and 1950. Hugo
Gernsback's *Amazing Stories* (1926) often plays a central role. Wolfe
says, for instance, \"science fiction, despite its healthy legacy
throughout the nineteenth century, was essentially a *designed* genre
after 1926.\" [^39] Even after that point, "the science fiction novel
persistently failed to cohere as a genre in the manner of mysteries and
Westerns" until *The Pocket Book of Science Fiction* emerged in 1943.
[^40] None of these crucial moments of consolidation are visible in the
model. Where language is concerned, the half-century from Verne through
Gernsback (1875-1925) appears just as coherent and as distinct from
other forms of fiction as the period after 1926. It's possible, of
course, that the model is wrong. Maybe the mere linguistic
distinctiveness of science fiction is not as important as other forms of
consolidation. But it also seems possible that the historiography of
science fiction has been unduly impressed by Gernsback's coinage of the
term "science fiction," or by the romance of the pulp era, or by the
symbolic centrality of certain technologies (like spaceflight), and has
tended to undersell the genre's fundamental coherence with earlier
traditions of scientific romance.

 

### **What have we learned?** {#what-have-we-learned style="text-align: center;"}

The evidence gathered in this article challenges three existing theories
of genre. Franco Moretti's conjecture that genre is a generational cycle
is probably the least important of these targets: Moretti offered it as
a reluctant speculation, and it has only been adopted by a few other
critics. [^41] The premise that genre boundaries gradually "consolidate"
in the early twentieth century is a more serious matter. The notion that
the pulps gave form to protean traditions that had previously "failed to
cohere" is very influential in science fiction criticism. [^42] I don't
think I have refuted this notion yet, but linguistic models provide at
any rate a striking lack of evidence for it: the distinctive language of
science fiction seems to take form before the institutions that are
supposed to have consolidated it. The third theory of genre I have
questioned is the recently popular notion that histories of genre are
merely a genealogical thread linking disparate cultural forms.
Predictive models can directly challenge this claim. If a model trained
on detective fiction before 1930 can also recognize detective (and
crime) fiction after that date, then the differences separating the
genre from the rest of the literary field must have remained relatively
stable.

But I should emphasize again that stable generic *boundaries* are not
the same thing as a stable *definition* of the content inside the
boundary*.* Although the particular words associated with genres are
often fascinating, I have treated those details deliberately casually
here, to avoid implying definitional claims. In fact, this essay relies
on predictive models exactly because they can bracket questions of
definition, and start instead from the wary, nominalistic premises that
underpin contemporary skepticism about genre. For instance, predictive
models easily embrace the notion that genres involve "family
resemblances" composed of many features rather than a single defining
characteristic. [^43] Predictive models are also quite compatible with
the assumption that genres are constituted by competing, subjective acts
of "labeling," rather than deep formal structures waiting to be
revealed. [^44] This article relies on computational methods because
they allow us to build on this sort of plural and perspectival
foundation. Otherwise it would have been difficult [---]{.emdash} for me
at any rate [---]{.emdash} to characterize and compare the strength of
complex family resemblances traced by many different observers.

But even an inquiry that begins from perspectival premises can end up
revealing that competing acts of labeling were actually, in some cases,
implicitly compatible. And even an inquiry founded on the premise of
historical mutability can turn out to show that the boundaries of some
genres remained stable for a century and a half. I think that is what we
have seen with detective fiction and science fiction (although perhaps
both genres do begin to "evaporate" by the end of the twentieth
century).

We cannot expect to see the same stability in every case. The cluster of
phenomena called Gothic, for instance, is more reluctant to coalesce.
Many nineteenth-century genres (like Newgate and sensation fiction) do
seem to be as short-lived as Moretti claimed. Even science fiction is
slightly more protean than detective fiction. If there is a single
central thesis to be drawn from this paper, it is that the things we
call "genres" may be entities of different kinds, with different life
cycles and degrees of textual coherence. Literary scholars have groped
toward some acknowledgment of this by distinguishing "genres," for
instance, from "modes." But that binary distinction seems insufficient
to describe the historical continuum explored here. Although this
article rejects Franco Moretti's conjecture that genres have a
generational rhythm, I think it vindicates his broader contention that
quantitative methods can give literary scholars descriptive resources
that are more flexible and more responsive to the complexity of our
material.

*Ted Underwood, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign*

 

**Appendix A:** Metadata.

The metadata used in modeling is available in the github repo as
finalmeta.csv. Each work can bear an unlimited number of "genre tags"
characterizing different groups it is associated with. This table
explains the meaning of the tags; there are a total of 962 texts. Most
of the texts are volume-sized, but a few are short stories.

  tag            \#texts   dates         description or source
  -------------- --------- ------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  det100         89        1829 - 1941   *The First Hundred Years of Detective Fiction, 1841-1941*. 1973. Lilly Library, Bloomington, IN. http://www.indiana.edu/\~liblilly/etexts/detective/
  chimyst        146       1923-1989     Works categorized by librarians as "detective" or "mystery fiction," collected at the Chicago Text Lab.
  locdetmyst     45        1832-1922     Works categorized by librarians as "detective and mystery fiction," collected in HathiTrust.
  locdetective   16        1865-1912     Works categorized by librarians with the subject heading "Detectives." Often casebook fiction.
  crime          2         1972-1974     Works categorized by librarians as "crime fiction" but not "detective fiction."
  cozy           10        1920-1952     Works by authors mentioned as writing country-house mysteries in The *Mystery Readers' Advisory: The Librarian's Clues to Murder and Mayhem*, by John Charles, Joanna Morrison, and Candace Clark (Chicago: ALA, 2002).
  hardboiled     10        1929-1970     Appendix to Geoffrey O'Brien, *Hardboiled America* (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1981).
  newgate        7         1828-1840     Keith Hollingsworth, *The Newgate Novel*, Detroit 1963.
  sensation      14        1860-1880     "The Sensation Novel," Winifred Hughes, in *A Companion to the Victorian Novel*, ed. Patrick Brantlinger and William B. Thesing (Blackwell, 2002).
  lockandkey     10        1800-1903     Works anthologized in *The Lock and Key Library: Classic Mystery and Detective Stories*, edited by Julian Hawthorne (New York, 1909). Includes writers like Dostoevsky who probably were not seen as writers of mysteries even in 1909; not included in the article's model of "detective fiction."
  pbgothic       96        1764-1988     "Chronology" in David Punter and Glennis Byron, *The Gothic* (Malden: Blackwell, 2004).
  stangothic     21        1791-1834     A small subset of works tagged as "Gothic" in Stanford Literary Lab metadata.
  lochorror      4         1818          Works tagged as "horror" by librarians, collected in HathiTrust.
  chihorror      23        1933-1989     Works tagged as "horror" by librarians, collected in the Chicago Text Lab.
  locghost       28        1826-1922     Works tagged as "ghost stories" by librarians.
  locscifi       21        1836-1909     Works tagged as "science fiction" by librarians and collected in HathiTrust.
  chiscifi       144       1901-1989     Works tagged as "science fiction" by librarians and collected at the Chicago Text Lab.
  femscifi       9         1818-1922     Ockerbloom, Mary Mark. 2015. "Pre-1950 Utopias and Science Fiction by Women."
  anatscifi      36        1771-1922     Stableford, Brian. 2004. "The Emergence of Science Fiction" and "Science Fiction Between the Wars." In *Anatomy of Wonder*, edited by Neil Barron, 5th edition, 3-44.
  chiutopia      13        1920-1976     Works tagged as "Utopias" by librarians, collected at the Chicago Text Lab, not folded into "science fiction" in this article.
  chifantasy     53        1901-1989     Works tagged as "fantastic" or "fantasy fiction" by librarians, not folded into "science fiction" for the purposes of this article.
  ---            ---       ---           ---
  juvenile       23        1904-1922     Works for a juvenile audience; collected but not used in this article.
  drop           33        1838-1922     Works that I decided not to use, left in the metadata for transparency. The most common reason is that they are juvenile.
  random         169       1769-1922     Works randomly selected from HathiTrust Digital Library, using fiction metadata developed in the NEH-funded project "Understanding Genre in a Collection of a Million Volumes." "Random selection" here means that the volumes were selected randomly but then approved or rejected by the author, to avoid stray volumes of nonfiction, classical poetry, juvenile works, etc.
  chirandom      202       1920-1989     Works randomly selected from the Chicago Text Lab. Selection here was more genuinely random. Note that both "random" tags can coexist with other genre tags. A randomly-selected volume could also be "chimyst," for instance; in that case it will be excluded from the negative (contrast) set only if "chimyst" is in the positive set.
  teamred        484       1760-1989     Randomly selected authors for a sanity check.
  teamblack      500       1764-1989     Randomly selected authors for a sanity check.
  stew           224       1764-1989     A random selection of volumes balanced between Gothic, science fiction, and crime/detective traditions, in order to create a ghastly genre stew.

\
**Appendix B.**

Is the github repo containing code, data, and metadata for the project,
located here:\
<https://github.com/tedunderwood/fiction>

[^1]: The author gratefully acknowledges the support of the NovelTM
    project, funded by Canada's Social Sciences and Humanities Research
    Council. Support for this project was also provided by Knowledge Lab
    at the University of Chicago, and by the Center for Advanced Study
    at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. HathiTrust Research
    Center guided my exploration of HathiTrust Digital Library; useful
    advice came from all the members of the NovelTM team, and from Jim
    English.

[^2]: Amy Devitt, *Writing Genres* (Carbondale: SIU Press, 2004);
    Carolyn Miller, "Genre as Social Action,"*Quarterly Journal of
    Speech* 70 (1984), 151-167.

[^3]: Pierre Bourdieu, *Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment
    of Taste* (Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1984); Paul DiMaggio,
    "Classification in Art," *American Sociological Review* 52 (1987):
    440-455.

[^4]: Franco Moretti, *Graphs, Maps, Trees* (London:Verso, 2005), 18.

[^5]: P.D. James, *Talking About Detective Fiction* ( New York: Vintage,
    2011).

[^6]: John Sears, *Stephen King's Gothic* (Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press, 2011), 51, 174.

[^7]: Moretti, *Graphs, Maps, Trees,* 31.

[^8]: see Roberts 2011 for an analogous theory of science fiction

[^9]: Maurizio Ascari, "The Dangers of Distant Reading: Reassessing
    Moretti's Approach to Literary Genres," *Genre* 47, no. 1 (2014),
    15.

[^10]: Matthew L. Jockers, *Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary
    History* (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2013), 67-81.

[^11]: Ronald Knox, "Introduction," *The Best Detective Stories of
    1928-29*, ed. Ronald Knox. Reprinted in Haycraft, Howard, *Murder
    for Pleasure: The Life and Times of the Detective Story*, Revised
    Edition (New York: Biblio and Tannen, 1976.

[^12]: Gary K. Wolfe, *Evaporating Genres: Essays on Fantastic
    Literature* (Middletown: Wesleyan University Press, 2011), 21.

[^13]: The process of normalizing texts hides pitfalls for the unwary.
    For instance, I have tried to remove front matter, prefaces, and
    running headers, which otherwise might include explicit genre labels
    the model would seize on. It is also potentially a concern that
    these texts are drawn from two different libraries (HathiTrust and
    Chicago Text Lab).

[^14]: Darko Suvin, "On the Poetics of the Science Fiction Genre,"
    *College English* 34, no. 3 (1972), 372.

[^15]: Paul Kincaid, "On the Origins of Genre," *Extrapolation* 44, no.
    4 (2003), 413-14.

[^16]: John Rieder, "On Defining SF, or Not: Genre Theory, SF, and
    History,"*Science Fiction Studies*, Vol. 37, no.2 (July 2010), 193.

[^17]: Leo Breiman, "Statistical Modeling: The Two Cultures,"
    *Statistical Science* 16, no. 3 (2001), 199-231.

[^18]: Hoyt Long and Richard Jean So, \" Literary Pattern Recognition:
    Modernism between Close Reading and Machine Learning,\" *Critical
    Inquiry* 42, no. 2 (2016), 266.

[^19]: 

[^20]: Pedregosa et al., "Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python,"
    *Journal of Machine Learning Research* 12 (2011), 2825-2830; Images
    are produced using Hadley Wickham, *ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for
    Data Analysis* (New York: Springer, 2009.

[^21]: If you convert predictive accuracy into Cohen's *d*, anything
    above 65% equates to a \"large effect.

[^22]: For the rationale see D. Sculley and Bradely M. Pasanek, "Meaning
    and Mining: The Impact of Implicit Assumptions in Data-Mining for
    the Humanities," *Literary and Linguistic Computing* 23, no 4
    (2008), 409-424.

[^23]: Since we will always be comparing two evenly sized categories in
    this paper, I won't bother distinguishing precision from recall.

[^24]: Underwood, "Code and data to support The Life Cycles of Genres,"
    2016, <https://github.com/tedunderwood/fiction>, doi:
    10.5281/zenodo.51361.

[^25]: Stephen Rachman, "Poe and the Origins of Detective Fiction," In
    *The Cambridge Companion to American Crime Fiction*, ed. Catherine
    Ross Nickerson (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 17-28.

[^26]: Moretti, *Graphs, Maps, Trees*, 31.

[^27]: Ascari, "The Dangers of Distant Reading," 15.

[^28]: Rieder, "On Defining SF, or Not,"15.

[^29]: Ascari, "The Dangers of  Distant Reading," 7, 15.

[^30]: Mark Bould and Sherryl Vint, "There is No Such Thing as Science
    Fiction," In *Reading Science Fiction*, ed. James Gunn, Marleen
    Barr, and Matthew Candelaria (New York: Palgrave, 2009), 48, 43.

[^31]: D.A. Miller, *The Novel and the Police* (Berkeley: University of
    California Press, 1988).

[^32]: Christopher Pittard, "From Sensation to the Strand," In *A
    Companion to Crime Fiction,* ed. Charles J. Rzepka and Lee Horsley
    (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010), 105-116.

[^33]: Juliann Fleenor ed., *The Female Gothic* (Montreal: Eden, 1983).

[^34]: Mark Edmundson, *Nightmare on Main Street: Angels, Sadomasochism,
    and the Culture of Gothic* (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
    1999).

[^35]: The metadata I use for the "Stanford Gothic" were developed at
    the Stanford Literary Lab; many hands may have been involved,
    including certainly those of Ryan Heuser and Matthew L. Jockers.

[^36]: David Punter and Glennis Byron, *The Gothic* (Malden: Blackwell,
    2004), xviii.

[^37]: Bould and Vint, "No Such Thing as Science Fiction,"; see also
    Kincaid, "On the Origins of Genre," Rieder, On Defining SF, or
    Not.\"

[^38]: Gary K. Wolfe, *Evaporating Genres: Essays on Fantastic
    Literature* (Middletown: Wesleyan University Press, 2011), viii.

[^39]: Wolfe, *Evaporating Genres*, 34.

[^40]: Wolfe, *Evaporating Genres*, 21.

[^41]: Adam Roberts,\" A Brief Note on Moretti and Science Fiction,\" In
    *Reading Graphs, Maps, Trees: Critical Responses to Franco Moretti,*
    ed. Jonathan Goodwin and John Holbo, (Anderson: Parlor Press, 2011),
    49-55.

[^42]: Wolfe, *Evaporating Genres*, 21

[^43]: Kincaid, \"On the Origins of Genre*\"*

[^44]: Rieder, "On Defining SF, or Not," 192-93.
