---
author: Tonia Sutherland
date: '06.04.19'
shortauthor: Tonia Sutherland
shorttitle: The Carceral Archive
title: |
    The Carceral Archive: Documentary Records, Narrative Construction, and
    Predictive Risk Assessment﻿
---

::: {.entry .print-only}
::: {#post-2404 .post-2404 .post .type-post .status-publish .format-standard .has-post-thumbnail .hentry .category-articles .tag-ongrid .tag-rightfeatured}
###### *Peer-Reviewed By: Anon.*

###### *Clusters: [Data](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/01/data/)*

###### *Article DOI: [10.22148/](http://doi.org/10.22148/16.037)[16.039](http://doi.org/10.22148/16.039)*

###### *Journal ISSN: 2371-4549*

###### *Cite: Tonia Sutherland, "The Carceral Archive: Documentary Records, Narrative Construction, and Predictive Risk Assessment," Journal of Cultural Analytics. June 4, 2019.*

 

Over the past three decades, scholarship in sociology, criminology, law,
public policy, history, science and technology studies (STS), and other
allied fields has addressed various areas of concern at the
intersections of race and correctional supervision in the United States.
Some scholars have argued that the modern day prison industrial complex
is a transparent extension of chattel slavery, while others have
asserted that a ubiquity of carceral ideologies has contributed to a
broader social inequality[---]{.emdash}one so affecting as to prevent
people from oppressed and marginalized communities from full
participation in American
life.^[1](#footnote_0_2404 "See for example: Alfred Blumstein, “On the Racial Disproportionality of United States’ Prison Populations,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 73, no. 3 (1982): 1259-1281; Manning Marable, “Black Prisons and Punishment in a Racist/Capitalist State,” in How Capitalism Underdeveloped Black America: Problems in Race, Political Economy, and Society (Haymarket Books, 2015; 1st edition 1983): 94–115; Robert J. Sampson and Janet L. Lauritsen, “Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Crime and Criminal Justice in the United States,” in Michael Tonry, ed., Ethnicity, Crime, and Immigration (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997); Marc Mauer, Race to Incarcerate (New York: The New Press, 1999); and David Cole, No Equal Justice: Race and Class in the American Criminal Justice System (New York: New Press, 2012)."){#identifier_0_2404
.footnote-link
.footnote-identifier-link}[2](#footnote_1_2404 "I would like to thank Dr. André Brock for his thoughtful and generative feedback on my early conceptualization of the carceral archive."){#identifier_1_2404
.footnote-link .footnote-identifier-link}^ This scholarship
unambiguously attests to ongoing disparities in rates of incarceration
calculated along the indices of race and ethnicity; with data cultures
expanding[---]{.emdash}evidenced by growth in sectors such as big data,
data science, and data analytics[---]{.emdash}in the sociocultural
landscapes and sociotechnical environments of the United States, more
recent scholarship has focused on the ways that technology also
contributes to[---]{.emdash}and often exacerbates[---]{.emdash}these
disparities.[^1]

Just as scholarship on correctional supervision was shifting to reckon
with data and its attendant technologies, archivists[---]{.emdash}those
who appraise, manage, preserve, and provide access to
data[---]{.emdash}and archival studies scholars were naturally also
embracing technological concerns. More recently, however, a body of
archival scholarship has also emerged that speaks to concerns about
race, representation, and the evidential value of documentary
records.[^2] Yet, despite the many overlapping interests of scholars,
archivists, and activists working on data justice concerns, these two
particular areas of inquiry[---]{.emdash}that which investigates the
relationships among race, data, and law enforcement and that which sits
at the nexus of race, data, and the documentary record[---]{.emdash}have
remained distinct. This paper interweaves these discussions, examining
how law enforcement data practices in the United States (e.g.
surveillant data mining, algorithmic primacy in offender risk
assessment) both draw upon and generate documentary records and risk
narratives that propagate a *carceral archive*, and how this carceral
archive in turn perpetuates discriminatory practices in the criminal
justice system.

I begin by introducing and defining the carceral archive, then argue
that law enforcement data practices create and sustain the carceral
archive by appropriating and exploiting social media data cultures.
Next, I interrogate how the carceral archive draws upon, contributes to,
and perpetuates the risk narratives that are used by the state to
justify the need for compulsory confinement. Connecting the dots between
our current system of mass incarceration and earlier forms of social
control, I argue that data cultures in contemporary policing have not
been inaugurated by new technologies; instead, these ongoing practices
are built on the violent history of chattel slavery and appeals to white
panic constructed around notions of order and "safety." Finally, I offer
a vision for the liberatory potential of archives[---]{.emdash}and the
archive[---]{.emdash}in contraposition to the carceral archive.

To conceptualize the carceral archive specifically as it relates to data
justice, I engage critical archival studies, digital culture studies,
and critical race theory as analytical frameworks. To frame my
discussion of carceral archives and "the carceral archive," I employ
critical archival studies. Per archival studies scholar Michelle
Caswell, critical archival studies: "(1) explains what is wrong with the
current state of archival and recordkeeping practice and research and
identifies who can change it and how; (2) posits achievable goals for
how archives and recordkeeping practices and research in archival
studies can and should change; and (3) provides norms and strategies and
mechanisms for forming such critique."[^3] Caswell further asserts that,
"Critical archival studies, like critical theory in general, is
unapologetically emancipatory in nature."[^4] In critical archival
studies, the transformation of archival practice and research is the
ultimate goal. To frame an understanding of the social media landscape
in which the surveillance of data cultures thrive, I employ digital
culture studies. Digital culture studies asks how new technologies
reflect the wider social world offline, how they create new cultural
interactions, and how those new interactions reshape the real
(non-virtual) world. Finally, throughout my analysis I employ critical
race theory (CRT). CRT is a broad theoretical framework stemming from a
synthesis of scholarly work that challenges dominant understandings of
race and the law. For the purposes of this article, CRT provides the
framework for a critique of the role of race and racism in the criminal
justice system; CRT also aids in creating space for thinking about more
liberatory data and archival praxes.

 

**The Carceral Archive** {#the-carceral-archive style="text-align:center"}
------------------------

Scholarly considerations of carcerality are typically built upon the
premise of policing and prisons, with scholarship on the carceral
routinely referencing Michel Foucault's 1975 text *Discipline and
Punish: The Birth of the Prison*, in which he dates the completion of
the carceral system to 1840 and the establishment of the Mettray prison
colony, a containment that Foucault deemed disciplinary form at its most
extreme.  For Foucault, in Mettray was the construction of a "carceral
continuum" that included confinement and judicial punishment as well as
institutions of discipline.[^5]

In her 2016 article, "Catching Our Breath: Critical Race STS and the
Carceral Imagination," sociologist Ruha Benjamin argues for a more
expansive understanding of "the carceral" that extends beyond the domain
of policing. Benjamin advocates for scholarly engagement with *carceral
imaginaries* as a conceptual lens applicable not only to those processes
that are directly tied to policing and prisons, but also to an
\"expansive understanding of containment that trains scholarly attention
to the underside of technoscientific development[---]{.emdash}who and
what are fixed in place[---]{.emdash}classified, corralled, and/or
coerced, to enable innovation\[.\]\"[^6] Benjamin further asserts that
"\[i\]n the postracial era, subjugation is hardly ever the explicit
objective of science and technology; instead, noble aims such as
'health' and 'safety' serve as a kind of moral prophylaxis for
newfangled forms of classification and control."[^7]

Although Benjamin was not speaking specifically about archives,
classification and control are distinctly archival concepts.
Classification involves assigning codes and categories of restriction as
well as of relationship and belonging, while notions of control are
concerned with management and oversight, measures taken to ensure
consistency, the production of evidence, and the safety and security of
archival records.[^8] Randall C. Jimerson, in his 2010 book *Archives
Power: Memory, Accountability, and Social Justice*, defines three types
of archival institutions: the temple, the restaurant, and the prison.
Temple institutions are collecting institutions where the archivist
preserves the "original" interpretation of items or collections;
restaurant institutions, by contrast, are institutions where the
archivist guides the user, allowing them to make their own decisions and
allowing the collections and items to speak for themselves. In prison
institutions, the archivist serves only the interpretations of an
oppressive higher power.[^9]

Applying Benjamin's carceral imaginary to archival studies, Jimerson's
prison institutions might be likewise designated"carceral archives."
Carceral archives are analogous to Jimerson's prison institutions in
that they are those archives[---]{.emdash}wherein archives are simply
and elegantly defined as "collections of records, the institutions that
steward them, and the processes that designated them
archival"[---]{.emdash}that fundamentally serve the interpretations of
oppressive state powers.[^10]

A full analysis of state-sponsored archives as carceral institutions
requires lengthy discussion, and warrants full treatment in a separate
work. However, because the focus of this work is the carceral
archive[---]{.emdash}in which carceral archives play an important
role[---]{.emdash}I will briefly outline three examples of archives as
carceral, paying specific attention to collections, institutions, and
processes.

The defining characteristic of carceral archives is that they comprise
records[---]{.emdash}or collections of records[---]{.emdash}held by
institutions, and that one or both work in the service of oppressive
state powers. To offer a simple but important example, state records
often provide the evidentiary basis to legitimize the power to
punish.[^11] As I will discuss in more detail later, both the policing
and prison endeavors in the US use state records in risk assessment;
recidivism and sentencing determinations; and pretrial decisions. These
records are components of a carceral system that both generates and
draws upon carceral archives. Similarly, recent archival studies
scholarship has criticized American archives that decline to collect and
make available evidence of human rights abuses that would support
restorative and transitional justice, particularly for Black and
Indigenous people. Archivist Lae'l Hughes-Watkins argues that these
carceral archives, in their refusal to collect in the service of
justice, are effectively "coconsipirator\[s\] in the violence against
Black bodies."[^12]

What is perhaps the most important impact of carceral archives is the
justifications for oppression that are codified, reinscribed, and
reinforced in these spaces, from carceral records and recordkeeping
practices to the narratives that emerge from them. Both as institutions
and as physical places, archives frequently read as carceral spaces.
Characterized by walls, gates, locked doors, surveillance cameras, and
security checkpoints, this material carcerality rests upon appeals to
societal ideals of "safety" and "risk," wherein archives must protect
humanity from itself. Archival repositories are therefore constructed as
closed spaces, and are so frequently experienced as such by users that
theory and practice related to archival access[---]{.emdash}from
concerns about archival custody and the ownership of evidentiary
records, to closed stacks practices and cultures of surveillance in
repository reading rooms[---]{.emdash}is a subject of some disciplinary
critique.[^13]

Records are more than data or information, they are also evidence of an
activity or decision. Determining the institutional, cultural, and
historical value of records based on their evidentiary, documentary, and
informational value is part and parcel of the archival endeavor, and one
of many processes that render records archival. Another such process is
archival representation (the arrangement and description of archival
records), in which classification and narrative are key components.
Archivists and the users of archives co-construct archival narratives
through processes of archival description and archival storytelling.
Archival description, the process describing the materials in the
archivist's care, is a highly political act. The narratives that are
used to describe archival materials help to define the records
themselves; description also plays a role in determining how the records
are used and by whom. The users of archives also construct narratives.
Indeed, from the archives emerge many of humankind's stories. The
stories that emerge specifically from carceral archives can be thought
of as carceral narratives.

Narrative construction[---]{.emdash}as well as the construction of
counternarratives or counterstories[---]{.emdash}is a key methodological
component of critical race theory. Similarly, the use of counterstories
in archives challenge the cultural dominance of the status quo, aid in
community building, and are indicators of the need to reallocate
power.[^14] Thinking critically about narrative construction,
incorporating Benjamin's thinking on carceral imaginaries, and extending
Jimerson's metaphor of prison institutions (carceral archives), I offer
a concept related to[---]{.emdash}*but distinct
from*[---]{.emdash}carceral archives: *the carceral archive.*

As is articulated above, archives are comprised of records,
institutions, and processes. "The archive," on the other hand, extends
beyond the documentary record to\
"enclose in one place all times, all epochs, all forms, all tastes ... a
place of all times that is itself outside of time."[^15] The archive,
then, is not temporally or materially bound; it encompasses all things
and all times. The *carceral archive* can be conceived of as a
sociocultural imaginary[---]{.emdash}a vision of the archive as a kind
of "temporal penitentiary in which oppressed people are locked in to a
dystopic present."[^16] The carceral archive represents the history and
memory of human existence that has been formed by and/or bound to
captivity, ownership, domination, control, imperialism, colonialism,
hegemony, forced conformity, and white supremacy. The carceral archive
is one in which oppressed people cannot escape the historical memory and
historical trauma that is codified, reinforced, reinscribed, and reified
in the documentary record as part of the work of maintaining dominant
cultural narratives. For oppressed and marginalized people, the carceral
archive is an embodied carceral reality[---]{.emdash}a lived experience
that stands in opposition to liberation and reinforces historical
notions of inferiority and disposability in the present. The carceral
archive comprises all of human experience that can be defined as
carceral, but here I will focus on archival data and the narratives that
emerge from them.

 

**Carceral Data** {#carceral-data style="text-align:center"}
-----------------

It is important that a discussion of carceral archives begin by naming
antiBlackness and other forms of racism as direct challenges to the
evidentiary value of state records. One central expression of neoliberal
culture is an emphasis on the state's carceral functions, what Noah de
Lissovoy has termed "the carceral turn."[^17] I contend that the use of
archives the United States has taken a sharp carceral turn, one in which
the actual[---]{.emdash}and disproportionate[---]{.emdash}incarceration
of marginalized people is justified by invoking the documentary record:
primary source data (specifically, for this discussion, social media
data) that has been appropriated for use by law enforcement and the
criminal justice system.

Government agencies (including state and national archives) capture,
produce, and maintain a multitude of records and artifacts, including
such things as founding documents, treaties, proclamations, records of
conflict, and increasingly vast amounts of primary source data on
individual citizens that comprise the documentary record. When primary
source data, regardless of form or format, is deemed public, it becomes
part of the public record. Evidence of the concept of public records
dates as far into history as ancient Babylon (where vital records such
as reports of births, deaths, and marriages were etched in cuneiform
into clay tablets), and is also associated with Native Hawaiian, Inca,
and ancient Chinese cultures (in which records were kept as *quipas*, or
talking knots). In the US, records maintained by the state fall into
several access categories, including classified, confidential, and
public. While access to and use of classified and confidential records
typically requires permission and/or security clearance, public records
comprise an official reporting of facts that are accessible to any
member of the community.

US law and policy both dictate what types of information is considered
public, where public information can be stored, how public information
can be distributed, and, importantly what categories of information are
included in the public record. Although public records laws vary in
scope and application, most government entities define public records
similarly, using broad classes that encompass all related information
regardless of physical form or characteristics.[^18] These
classification schemas were designed to remain relevant as the form and
format of communication changed over time, and are inclusive of
everything from parchment to paper to digital media. In most states,
public records include documents, papers, letters, maps, books, tapes,
photographs, film or sound recordings, information stored or maintained
electronically, and data-processed or image- processed documents.
Importantly, in recent years, social media data has also come to be
considered part of the public record. In modern history, public records
have been generally understood to represent "the official reporting of
facts;" however, there has been a significant epistemic shift in how we
understand the concept of public records[---]{.emdash}and notions of
fact, or *authenticity*[---]{.emdash}where social media data is
concerned.Whereas public records were historically just
that[---]{.emdash}records of public activity[---]{.emdash}social media
data exists to serve the private corporate and commercial interests of
the company. Although they might be considered shareholders, the user is
not the customer on social media platforms. They are the indirect,
rather than the direct source of revenue; rather, those that purchase
user data and advertising space are the customers.

Social media can be beneficial in a multitude of ways. It allows people
to build professional and personal networks; exposes new ideas;
amplifies voices; allows for greater advocacy; and has the potential to
act as an equalizer, creating space for multiple voices. On the other
hand, rather than solely being a mode of interpersonal communication,
social media is part of the state record.[^19] Many social media users
have a (false) expectation of privacy and conduct themselves on social
media platforms as though they are in the private sphere; the reality
is, however, that social media users gain access to the means of data
production (the social media platform) by surrendering rights of
ownership to their data, and by extension, their privacy. Research has
shown that in the private sphere of social media, people construct
identities that may not correspond to their more public lived
realities.[^20] Whether presenting idealized versions of themselves, or
versions that are larger-than-life, social media data are not
necessarily reliable evidence of a person's actual beliefs, attitudes,
or even conduct. This tension between the private and public spheres is
critical to inquiries about the evidentiary value of social media and
its attendant data and metadata as public records, particularly in light
of law enforcement's ongoing use of these data for criminal justice
purposes.[^21]

In addition to the tensions between the public and the private, the
nuances of the interplay between data and metadata and between narrative
and counter-narrative in social media data also raise questions about
these data as reliable evidentiary records. Archivists are concerned
with issues of provenance and the continuous chain of responsible
custody; with preservation over interpretation; and records as of
evidence of decisions, activities, and policies. This is true of all
records and data, but thus far, the demonstrated use of social media
data by law enforcement agencies lacks the nuanced reading of data as
archival evidence that would make data justice possible.

Increasingly used with predictive technologies to assess potential risk,
social media data feeds the mechanisms that reinforce the carceral
state. For example, social media data is used in presentence
investigation reports and by Homeland Security in the context of border
surveillance and control. This data is routinely monitored, collected,
and used by the FBI and other law enforcement agencies as part of their
justification for incarcerating immigrants at the US border.[^22] For
those who are already vulnerable, social media data[---]{.emdash}shared
digital files; Twitter, Instagram, Facebook, Reddit, Yelp! and other
posts; uploads and downloads; participation in groups or other online
communities; as well as the metadata such as date, location, and time
stamps generated by each of these activities[---]{.emdash}is carceral
data, evidence of activity open to interpretation by the state. Thus,
every interaction on social media also becomes part of a person's
carceral archives, part of the record that can be easily deployed to
construct the narratives that are used to justify the need for
compulsory containment. By 2014, police were already using social media
to apprehend criminals; today, largely as a result of increasingly
surveillant data cultures, these practices have evolved and
expanded.[^23]

In her 2018 article "Critical Surveillance Literacy in Social Media:
Interrogating Black Death and Dying Online," critical race and digital
studies scholar Safiya Umoja Noble advocates for a developing a critical
surveillance literacy for social media, arguing that "increasing
resources have been allocated in service of new forms of record keeping
by the state, as new federal and municipal commitments to surveillance
... \[have escalated.\]"[^24] Noble further emphasizes two carceral
concerns[---]{.emdash}commodification and political
economy[---]{.emdash}in social media surveillance, arguing that
"collecting and using social media records and digital artifacts
contributes to the persistent domination of Black Americans."[^25] What
follows the construction of carceral archives by way of surveillance and
data mining in the modern criminal justice system is a process of
narrative construction and storytelling: the transformation of
evidentiary information, data, and metadata into legal evidence, and the
furnishing of that evidence in hearings and trials in support of
carceral outcomes. These narratives, fashioned from the records of state
powers, easily lend themselves to the social and cultural construction
of the carceral archive, signaling a need to compose counternarratives.

At the inaugural Data for Black Lives conference at MIT in November
2016, Charmaine L. Arthur, Director of Community Programs for Freedom
House (a Boston nonprofit), offered a compelling argument about the
power of narrative and the danger of one story. Arthur, in arguing that
an individual story is not the story of an entire community, noted that
data allows for the telling of multiple stories. At the same time, she
expressed doubt that communities of color have been empowered to control
their own narratives. Rather, the narratives that have historically
emerged from data mined and produced by the state are oppressive and
racialized, frequently casting Black and brown people as savage,
dangerous, and worthy of fear.[^26] History also has many examples to
offer in terms of the use of surveillance tactics in producing
data-based narratives about marginalized peoples. One such example is
the FBI Counterintelligence Program (COINTELPRO), which in the 1950s and
1960s operated disruption and disinformation campaigns aimed at
discrediting and raising suspicion about people[---]{.emdash}including
many Black liberation activists[---]{.emdash}who were deemed subversive.

David Lyon, Director of the Surveillance Studies Centre at Queen's
University, and credited with spearheading the field of surveillance
studies, argues that an appropriate focus in surveillance studies is to
center attention on "sites of surveillance," and names government
administration, policing and crime control, and consumer activity as
three such sites.[^27] Centering social media as a "site of
surveillance" exposes the social media data being used by law
enforcement and the criminal justice system as the deeply problematic
product of a carceral archive that rests upon highly racialized cultures
of surveillance (including surveillance technologies). The history of
policing as a site of surveillance also offers important insights into
the archive of contemporary US antiBlack risk narratives and the
carceral archives that are used to construct them.

 

**Carceral Narratives** {#carceral-narratives style="text-align:center"}
-----------------------

> "Surveillance is nothing new to black folks. It is a fact of
> antiblackness."
>
> Simone Browne[^28]

In the United States, carcerality is a complex and racialized premise.
The development of policing in the United States is closely aligned with
the development of policing in England. In the early American colonies,
informal and communal policing was known as "The Watch," and
private-for-profit policing, known as "The Big Stick."[^29] The watch
system was a volunteer system in which the role of watchmen, who often
slept or drank on duty, was to warn of impending danger. Augmenting the
watch system was a system of constables, official law enforcement
officers, paid on commission for warrants served. It was not until the
1830s that the idea of a centralized municipal police department first
emerged in the United States, but by the 1880s all major U.S. cities had
municipal police forces in place.[^30]To articulate a critical race and
critical archival counter-narrative of policing and crime control in the
US is to acknowledge that these practices were[---]{.emdash}and continue
to be[---]{.emdash}inextricably tied to the violent history of chattel
slavery.

In the southern United States the origin of modern policing
organizations was the slave patrol. Slave patrols had three main
functions: to apprehend and return enslaved people who had taken flight;
to provide a form of organized terror in an effort to deter uprising;
and to execute extrajudicial discipline (lynching and other forms of
vigilante justice) to enslaved people deemed to be in violation of
plantation rules. During Reconstruction, these vigilante organizations
evolved into Southern police departments, existing primarily to control
freed Black people and to enforce Jim Crow segregation laws. In the days
after the Civil War, former enslaved people and their descendants were
often arrested for minor violations, burdened with imposing fines, then
incarcerated until the fines were paid. In a system penal labor known as
convict leasing, the only way by which the fines could be paid was to
either toil on the farms and plantations from which they had just been
freed, to toil in the deathly depths of coal mines, or to labor in
prisons that had been converted to work farms.[^31] Because convicts
were too meagerly compensated to pay their fines, this labor system
effectively amounted to (re)enslavement.

The resubjugation of Black men and boys was a saleable enterprise that
white Southerners could powerfully leverage in commercial endeavors.
This "new" Southern economy demanded the criminalization of Black life,
which in turn led to a long-term pattern of increased policing projects
and new financial markets in security services. Incarcerating Black men
became an exceptionally profitable financial enterprise of its own. At
the same time that slave patrols and convict leasing were fiscally sound
enterprises, they also proffered strict social control, maintaining what
Michelle Alexander terms the American "racial caste system."[^32]
Present-day threats to this political and financial economy only
intensify state efforts to uphold policing (and subsequent
incarceration) as a means of mitigating risk, which is ultimately seen
as a public good.[^33]

Risk can mean threat, the possibility of loss or injury, the suggestion
of hazard, the chance of peril. Patients might be at risk of infection,
an investor risks the chance that a commodity will lose value. Safety,
on the other hand, implies protection from danger or injury. Protection
from risk. The racialized and colonial history of the concepts of risk
and safety in America dates to the earliest days of settler colonialism
and the idea of the savage native. White European colonizers met their
demand for land by conquering the sacred ancestral lands of Indigenous
tribes. Indigenous people were seen as a threat to European progress,
risking the safety of the colonial project. Images of Indigenous people
in books and newspapers painted them as savages to be feared, risks to
be averted. As more Africans, and then enslaved Africans, were brought
to the eastern shores, Black men were depicted as innately destructive,
animalistic, and criminal. The Black "brute" was a sociopathic and
anti-social menace, a predator whose primary victim was white women.
Sociologist David Pilgrim writes that

The "terrible crime" most often mentioned in connection with the Black
brute was rape, specifically the rape of a white woman. At the beginning
of the twentieth century, much of the virulent, anti-black propaganda
that found its way into scientific journals, local newspapers, and
best-selling novels focused on the stereotype of the Black rapist. The
claim that Black brutes were, in epidemic numbers, raping white women
became the public rationalization for the lynching of \[Black
men\].[^34]

Slave patrols were not only deployed in the service of returning
enslaved people who had run toward freedom, they were expressly deployed
to maintain the safety, security, and purity of white women. As the
rhetoric of law and order was mobilized in the American South in the
1950s, systematically linking Civil Rights to crime[---]{.emdash}still
embedded with notions of native savages, Black brutes, and the purity of
white women[---]{.emdash}little effort was made to disguise the racial
motivations behind rhetorics of safety and risk.[^35] Using an
ahistorical understanding of risk and safety rhetoric to underpin
contemporary thinking about risk analysis as a law enforcement tool is
to understand that the omniveillance and mass incarceration of Black and
brown communities is part and parcel of a ritual and deeply racialized
performance a carceral archive, constructed around narratives of law and
order, safety and risk. The racist tropes of the native savage and the
Black brute and the racialized rhetoric of safety and risk contribute to
a national carceral archive, with long-lasting and potentially
devastating human consequences.

More than crime, modern police forces in the United States emerged as a
response to perceptions of disorder. In *Dark Matters,* scholar
SimoneBrowne argues that oppressed people have long been imagined as out
of place and that technologies of control and order were developed in
order to diagnose, map, and correct these conditions.[^36] In the 19th
century, social order was determined by the interests of the mercantile
class, who were more interested in social control than crime control. In
creating a police force, these mercantiles were interested in protecting
their own financial enterprises, and in making those costs the
responsibility of the state.[^37] State-sponsored policing in the name
of order and safety has, from the beginning, claimed a demand for
surveillance and social control. That this history of policing is tied
to commerce and chattel slavery is evident in modern-day law
enforcement. Statistically, the number of incarcerated Americans from
communities of color in the United States continues to rise
disproportionately, and resulting concerns about the human and social
consequences of mass incarceration at the current scale have led to
calls for criminal justice reform and the abolishment of prisons.

The fiscal landscape of the criminal justice system (alternately dubbed
the "prison industrial complex") in the US has also shifted, not away
from profit, but toward even more complex and corrupt revenue streams.
The United States government holds many lucrative contracts with the
private prison industry. Private prisons receive a stipend from the
government, the amount of which in most cases is determined based on the
number of inmates housed in the penal complex. As with most businesses,
shareholder primacy demands perpetual growth, which means that earnings
for each fiscal year must supersede the year preceding. In order to stay
in business, private prisons need a nearly constant stream of incoming
inmates to replace those that have completed their sentences. In simple
terms, this means that laws have to be enforced, and in some cases more
strictly enforced.

By 2015, 33 states boasted privately funded prisons. That same year,
mainstream media outlets reported multiple instances of judges accepting
monetary incentives from private prisons for subjecting criminal
defendants to stricter[---]{.emdash}and longer[---]{.emdash}sentences in
corporate, for-profit prison environments.[^38]In March 2018 the Prison
Policy Institute reported that the American criminal justice system
holds almost 2.3 million people in state and federal prisons, juvenile
correctional facilities, local jails, and Indian Country jails as well
as in military prisons, immigration detention facilities, civil
commitment centers, state psychiatric hospitals, and prisons in the U.S.
territories. Another 3.7 million people are on probation and 840,000 are
on parole. Black, Indigenous, and other people of color are dramatically
overrepresented in the nation's prisons and jails. These racial
disparities are particularly stark for Black people, who comprise 40% of
those incarcerated despite representing only 13% of U.S population.
Gender and age disparities matter as well: rates of incarceration have
grown even faster for women and youth than for men.[^39] Because the
prison profit model depends on the continuity of incarceration, and
because of America's structural, systemic, and institutional racism,
critics of the justice system have advocated taking sentencing, bail,
parole, and recidivism decisions out of the hands of fallible human
judges in favor of "neutral" algorithmic tools known as Risk and Needs
Assessment (RNA) algorithms.

Risk assessments have existed in various forms for a century, and courts
have used actuarial tools in the service of offender risk assessment for
at least the past 30 years. Over the past two decades, however, these
tools have become ubiquitous in the American justice system, driven in
part by advances in the social and computer sciences, and in part by the
rapid uptake in human incarceration. Risk and Needs Assessments (RNAs)
are proprietary algorithmic tools used to inform decisions at every
stage of the U.S. criminal justice system from bail to parole. RNAs try
to predict the risk of recidivism using statistical probabilities that
are based on data extracted from public and other state
records[---]{.emdash}a practice that I have already argued is deeply
flawed, contributes to and draws upon a carceral archive, and that does
not adjust or account for antiBlackness and racialized cultures of
surveillance. Notions of risk and safety, as I discuss here, are also
flawed and racialized concepts in the United States.

Many scholars have addressed, from varying perspectives, how oppressive
worldviews and racialized biases are built into modern tools and
technologies. Safiya Umoja Noble's *Algorithms of Oppression: How Search
Engines Reinforce Racism* identifies data discrimination as a pressing
social problem. In her book *Breathing Race into the Machine* historian
Lundy Braun argues that cultural notions of race are embedded in the
architecture of ordinary instruments.[^40] Similarly, in her book
*Automating Inequality: How High-Tech Tools Profile, Police, and Punish
the Poor*, political scientist Virginia Eubanks investigates the impacts
of data mining, policy algorithms, and predictive risk models on
economic inequality in the United States. Others have discussed how the
interview protocol that accompanies the RNA algorithmic tool also
reinforce existing class- and race-based injustices and perpetuate
cycles of incarceration. The data sets that feed the algorithms that
determine RNA scores, as data scientist Cathy O'Neil argues in *Weapons
of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens
Democracy*, often includes data about nuisance crimes, like panhandling
and vagrancy, that are most common in poverty-stricken areas.[^41]
Including this crime data skews the algorithmic analysis; once the data
is included in a predictive model, neighborhoods with high levels of
nuisance (rather than violent) crime are subject to increased policing
which in turn leads to more arrests. Once a person has been arrested
once, the likelihood of subsequent arrest rises, and much like convict
leasing during Reconstruction, people who can't afford to pay court
fines, legal fees, and other debt associated with the penal system, are
re-incarcerated for failure to pay. As the organizers of the October 207
Data For Black Lives conference stressed in writing about the event,

Tools like statistical modeling, data visualization, and crowd-sourcing,
in the right hands, are powerful instruments for fighting bias, building
progressive movements, and promoting civic engagement.  But history
tells a different story[---]{.emdash}one in which data is too often
wielded as an instrument of oppression, reinforcing inequality and
perpetuating injustice ... Today, discrimination is a high-tech
enterprise.[^42]

It is not surprising, given the racialized history of law and order in
the US, that when data wielded as an instrument of oppression, it is
frequently cloaked in the rhetoric of safety and risk. Carceral data,
classed and sorted, classified and confidential, public and private is
the cornerstone of contemporary omniveillance campaigns[---]{.emdash}one
that is closely tied to slavery era risk management and disorder
narratives.

Criminal risk assessments are used in sentencing, parole, and bail.
Tools typically consist of a set of questions that guide face-to-face
interviews with offenders, probing behaviors and attitudes that are
believed to be related to criminal reoffending, and as previously
discussed, the questionnaire is supplemented with an official records
check, of public and other state records. Responses to the questionnaire
are statistically weighted, based how strongly each item is thought to
correlate with recidivism. The tool then calculates an overall score
that classifies an individual's risk of reoffending. This risk level and
accompanying information about an offender's unique needs then inform
decisions about bail, sentencing, probation, parole, detention
facilities, and other considerations. RNA tools can be customized for
use by different agencies at various decision points in the sentencing
and corrections process.

There are typically at least seven dynamic risk factors closely
associated with criminal conduct that are assessed: antisocial
personality pattern, pro-criminal attitudes, social supports for crime,
substance abuse, poor family/marital relationships, school/work failure,
and lack of pro-social recreational activities.[^43] A number of risk
assessment instruments incorporate data about a defendant's employment
status, income, education, and job skills. In addition to other forms of
risk, these instruments calculate stated risks such as a defendant's
risk of not showing up for court and risk of re-arrest. Arguably, there
are many reasons that a defendant might miss a court
appearance[---]{.emdash}work, childcare, transportation[---]{.emdash}all
of which have financial and racial correlates, meaning the risks being
measured are automatically higher for some. As evidenced by a sample RNA
used by the Correctional Offender Management Profile for Alternative
Sanctions (COMPAS), and the risk factors listed above, the interview
protocols that accompany RNA algorithms ask questions that are proxies
for race and class, such as questions about gang affiliation, belief
that the criminal justice system is rigged, welfare status, and parental
incarceration. These questions create a feedback loop wherein one's
place of birth or one's current address might lead to a longer sentence,
reduced chances for probation or parole, and assumptions about
recidivism. Importantly, for the arguments set forth in this paper, the
most widely known source of data used to train RNA algorithms is state
or government data, specifically that which is deemed to be part of the
public record. As previously discussed, this data includes everything
from vital statistics and demographic information to social media posts
and neighborhood crime statistics.

There are six commonly used RNA tools: the Correctional Assessment and
Intervention System (CAIS); the Level of Service Inventory-Revised
(LSI-R) and Level of Service/Case Management Inventory (LS/CMI); the
Offender Screening Tool (OST); the Ohio Risk Assessment System (ORAS);
the Static Risk and Offender Needs Guide (STRONG); and, perhaps most
well known, the Correctional Offender Management Profile for Alternative
Sanctions (COMPAS). These tools are now used at some stage of the
criminal justice process in nearly every state in America. Kentucky, for
example, requires RNA results in presentence investigation reports to
determine whether an offender is eligible for alternatives to
incarceration. Algorithmic RNAs are usually used in conjunction with
interview protocols and evaluations of defendant rehabilitation needs.
The National Institute of Corrections, part of the Federal Justice
Department, encourages these combined assessments throughout every stage
of the criminal justice process.

There have been several pieces of proposed RNA legislation introduced
before Congress in recent years. For example, Senate Bill 2123 (S.2123),
the Sentencing Reform and Corrections Act of 2015, stipulates the
development of a Post-Sentencing Risk and Needs Assessment System
designed to determine recidivism risk, determine the risk of violence,
collocate low-risk offenders, assign prisoners activities based on risk
level, determine the specific criminogenic needs of each prisoner,
determine a set schedule for reassessment, and provide best practices to
lower the risk of recidivism. In developing the Assessment System, and
determining what records it will include, the Attorney General is
encouraged to consult with academics and criminal justice experts as
deemed appropriate.[^44] Strikingly, this proposed legislation
recommends that the Bureau of Prisons incorporate existing Inmate
Classification Systems into federal RNAs. Inmate Classification Systems
records, or Objective Jail Classification Systems, are designed
specifically to reduce escapes and escape attempts, suicides and suicide
attempts, and inmate assaults.[^45] Nothing in these systems or in
proposed legislation speaks to rehabilitation, individual and community
health and growth, or the potential for discriminatory design to embed
racist beliefs and ideologiesinto the very architecture of safety and
risk technologies such as RNAs. The ramifications are critical because
proposed legislation would not allow for the system to be challenged,
leaving those incarcerated with no means of appeal:

Subject to any constitutional limitations, there shall be no right of
review, right of appeal, cognizable property interest, or cause of
action, either administrative or judicial, arising from any
determination or classification made by any Federal agency or employee
while implementing or administering the Assessment System, or any rules
or regulations promulgated under this section.[^46]

Although we cannot know for sure how much, there is evidence to suggest
that law enforcement databases also include robust data from the
Department of Homeland Security. In May 2010, the Secretary of Homeland
Security established a Policy for Integrated Risk Management (IRM), also
known as the 2011 Homeland Security Risk Management Doctrine. Central to
this policy were the ideas that risk management should be collaborative,
and that risk management systems should be integrated with and sustained
by federal, state, local, tribal, territorial, nongovernmental, and
private sector homeland security partners, meaning that data could and
should be extracted from all available sources. The Doctrine stipulates
that the Department of Homeland Security should play an essential role
in leading a unified effort to manage risks to the United States from a
"diverse and complex set of hazards."[^47]

Some of the most commonly used data sources for Homeland Security risk
analysis include archival and other historical records (carceral
archives); models and simulations; and interviews with subject matter
experts (typically done when historical records do not exist or are not
deemed to be "appropriate"). The Doctrine further stresses that
\"structured techniques, such as *value focused thinking* (emphasis
mine), can help the analyst determine which aspects of \[the
consequences of a breach in security\] should be included in the
methodology\" and that "the gathered data and evidence should be
carefully studied and compared to previous work" as part of validation
and verification, further noting that, "In a broad assessment, the
decision maker will often have specific areas they are particularly
interested in, and will ask the analysts to focus in on those
areas."[^48] As has already been demonstrated, the "values," "previous
work," "specific areas \[of interest\]" that fall under the purview of
law enforcement are highly racialized and frequently lead to further
oppression and marginalization of black, Indigenous, and other people of
color.

The Department of Homeland Security U.S. Customs and Border Protection
(CBP) also operates the Automated Targeting System (ATS), a "decision
support" tool that compares traveler, cargo, and conveyance information
against law enforcement, intelligence, and other enforcement data using
risk-based scenarios and assessments. ATS compares information about
individuals (identified as passengers, travelers, crewmembers, or
persons appearing on documents supporting the movement of cargo) against
the Terrorist Screening Database as well as against available data on
outstanding wants and warrants.[^49] ATS maintains an official record of
license plate data; Department of Motor Vehicle registration data;
biographical data; law enforcement and/or intelligence data; reports,
and projects developed by CBP analysts that may include public source
information; and information obtained through memoranda of understanding
or other arrangements.

Finally, ATS maintains copies of or access to key elements of certain
databases including, but not limited to: border crossing information,
special protected classes data; student exchange and visitor
information; the Enforcement Integrated Database, which
includes[---]{.emdash}but is again not limited to[---]{.emdash}criminal
arrest records (including RNA analyses) and immigration enforcement
records; secure flight passenger data and master crew list data from the
Transportation Security Administration; the Department of Justice's
National Crime Information Center and Federal Bureau of Investigation's
Interstate Identification Index; the Social Security Administration
(SSA) Death Master File; nonimmigrant and immigrant visa data from the
US Department of State; the National Insurance Crime Bureau's private
database of stolen vehicles; e3 Biometrics System data; DHS Automated
Biometric Identification System; and, notably, commercial data
aggregators. A person flagged by the Automated Targeting System for any
reason stands to be incarcerated and/or deported. Because of increased
cultures of data sharing, and continuing rhetorics of safety and risk,
access to these databases for any criminal justice or law enforcement
purpose is likely to be granted.

Given the opacity of RNAs; their proprietary nature; the capitalist and
corporate needs they serve; the carceral and racialized data practices
that feed the algorithmic tools; and the racialized histories,
surveillance cultures, and technologies that produce them, the inability
to challenge the results of risk and needs assessments raises serious
concerns about modern-day correctional supervision. Also given the
history of policing from slave patrols and convict leasing to the
enforcement of racist Jim Crow segregation laws, one would be remiss to
not center concerns about the discriminatory aspects of risk and needs
assessments, risk management, and algorithmic design. An algorithm is
simply a set of guidelines that describe how to perform a task. Just as,
historically, those guidelines for performing the task of policing were
built on racist and oppressive beliefs and practices, so too can today's
algorithms and computer models show bias against oppressed and
marginalized people. Too frequently the very data used to train those
algorithms reflect existing cultural biases.

As I have already suggested, the for-profit prison industrial complex
depends on a constant stream of offenders to maintain profit margins.
Notions of carcerality, deeply imbedded in American history and culture,
must continually be reinscribed and reinforced to serve the fiscal needs
of the penal project and to maintain the racialized norms of an
oppressive and carceral society. This is the function of carceral
archives and, I would argue, what it means to live within the carceral
archive.

 

**Toward Liberation** {#toward-liberation style="text-align:center"}
---------------------

In this paper I have introduced and defined two new and interrelated
terms: carceral archives and "the carceral archive." I have argued that
mass incarceration, risk assessments, recidivism, sentencing
determinations, and pretrial decisions are all components of a single
carceral system that generates and draws upon the carceral archive, and
I have argued that the state has created and sustained carceral archives
by appropriating and exploiting data cultures, particularly social media
data culture. I have interrogated how carceral archives contribute to
and perpetuate risk narratives that are used by the state to justify
incarceration. I have also argued that contemporary state data and
algorithmic practices are not new, but are instead constructed around
racialized, carceral narratives around order, risk, and safety.

Here, I will close by arguing that to take up a liberatory and
decolonial position is to 1) insist that racism and colonialism no
longer factor into sustaining and reinforcing the intersecting data and
algorithmic practices of the criminal justice system, and 2) work to
elucidate how sociocultural and sociotechnical bias in data mining,
algorithmic practices, and data production contribute to the national
epidemic of physical and socio-psychological incarceration of oppressed
and marginalized people. I would like to suggest that if there is a
carceral archive[---]{.emdash}and there are carceral
archives[---]{.emdash}then we must also construct liberatory archives
and attend to the archive of liberation. An archive of liberation, or
the *liberatory archive* requires understanding how people are
positioned by data systems and data science. The state records and data
practices that support and enable algorithmic risk assessment are
enacted by knowledge creators who imbue new types of technology with old
social harms. These sociocultural biases, historically imbedded into
unjust "justice" systems and fortified by capital enterprise, do not
continue by social, cultural, technological, legal, or fiscal mandate.
The distribution of resources is a political decision, as is the
allocation of billions of dollars to policing and mass incarceration
each year. So, too, is the decision to rely on the carceral narratives
constructed by algorithms from state records and government-mined data.
Richard Gray, Jr., Director of Community Organizing and Engagement at
Brown University's Education Justice Network, noted at the inaugural
Data for Black Lives Conference in 2017 that "Every point of data is a
story about somebody's life. It's poetry. It needs to be told."[^50]
Presenting data that respects the stories that it represents is
liberatory praxis: it is a means to dismantling the carceral archive in
service of liberation.

![](88x31.png "https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by/4.0/88x31.png")

Unless otherwise specified, all work in this journal is licensed under
a [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
:::
:::

[^1]: See for example: Michelle Alexander, *The New Jim Crow: Mass
    Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness* (The New Press: New
    York, 2011) and Virginia Eubanks, *Automating Inequality: How
    High-Tech Tools Profile, Police, and Punish the Poor* (New York: St.
    Martin's Press, 2018).

[^2]: See for example: Kim Christen, "Does Information Really Want to be
    Free? Indigenous Knowledge Systems and the Question of Openness,"
    *International Journal of Communication* 6 (2012); Stacie Williams
    and Jarrett M. Drake, "Power to the People: Documenting Police
    Violence in Cleveland," in "Critical Archival Studies," eds.
    Michelle Caswell, Ricardo Punzalan, and T-Kay Sangwand, Special
    issue, *Journal of Critical Library and Information Studies* 1, no.
    2 (2017): 1-27; Mario Ramirez, "On 'Monstrous' Subjects and Human
    Rights Documentation," In *Emerging Trends in Archival Science*,
    Karen F. Gracy, ed. (Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, 2017); Tonia
    Sutherland, "Archival Amnesty: In Search of Black American
    Transitional and Restorative Justice," *Journal of Critical Library
    and Information Studies* 2 (2017); and Lae'l Hughes-Watkins, "Moving
    Toward a Reparative Archive: A Roadmap for a Holistic Approach to
    Disrupting Homogenous Histories in Academic Repositories and
    Creating Inclusive Spaces for Marginalized Voices." *Journal of
    Contemporary Archival Studies* 5 (2018): 1-17. (1)
    <https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/jcas/vol5/iss1/6>.

[^3]: See for example: Kim Christen, "Does Information Really Want to be
    Free? Indigenous Knowledge Systems and the Question of Openness,"
    *International Journal of Communication* 6 (2012); Stacie Williams
    and Jarrett M. Drake, "Power to the People: Documenting Police
    Violence in Cleveland," in "Critical Archival Studies," eds.
    Michelle Caswell, Ricardo Punzalan, and T-Kay Sangwand, Special
    issue, *Journal of Critical Library and Information Studies* 1, no.
    2 (2017): 1-27; Mario Ramirez, "On 'Monstrous' Subjects and Human
    Rights Documentation," In *Emerging Trends in Archival Science*,
    Karen F. Gracy, ed. (Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, 2017); Tonia
    Sutherland, "Archival Amnesty: In Search of Black American
    Transitional and Restorative Justice," *Journal of Critical Library
    and Information Studies* 2 (2017); and Lae'l Hughes-Watkins, "Moving
    Toward a Reparative Archive: A Roadmap for a Holistic Approach to
    Disrupting Homogenous Histories in Academic Repositories and
    Creating Inclusive Spaces for Marginalized Voices." *Journal of
    Contemporary Archival Studies* 5 (2018): 1-17. (1)
    <https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/jcas/vol5/iss1/6>.

[^4]: Caswell, "Critical Archival Studies,"
    <http://escholarship.org/uc/item/75x090df>.

[^5]: Michel Foucault, *Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison,*
    trans. Alan Sheridan, (New York: Vintage Books, 1979).

[^6]: Michel Foucault, *Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison,*
    trans. Alan Sheridan, (New York: Vintage Books, 1979).

[^7]: Benjamin, "Catching Our Breath," 150.

[^8]: For specific definitions of these terms in an archival context,
    see Society of American Archivists, "Glossary of Archival and
    Records Terminology," <https://www2.archivists.org/glossary>.

[^9]: Randall C. Jimerson, *Archives Power: Memory, Accountability, and
    Social Justice*, (Chicago: Society of American Archivists, 2009).

[^10]: For a clear and thoughtful delineation between "the archive" and
    "archives" please see Michelle Caswell, "'The Archive' is Not An
    Archives: On Acknowledging the Intellectual Contributions of
    Archival Studies," *Reconstruction* 16, no. 1 (2016): 1-21.
    Specifically, Caswell notes that \"'the archive' denotes a
    hypothetical wonderland, the 'first law of what can be said, the
    system that governs the appearance of statements as unique events,'
    according to Foucault, or a curious materialization of the death
    drive and pleasure principle according to Derrida. ... \[A\]rchives
    ...

[^11]: By invoking the idea of "state," archives  here, I am referring
    to the larger body politic, rather than archives maintained by
    individual US states.

[^12]: Lae'l Hughes-Watkins, "Moving Toward a Reparative Archive: A
    Roadmap for a Holistic Approach to Disrupting Homogenous Histories
    in Academic Repositories and Creating Inclusive Spaces for
    Marginalized Voices," *Journal of Contemporary Archival Studies* 5
    (2018): 1-17. (1)
    <https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/jcas/vol5/iss1/6>. See also
    Tonia Sutherland, "Archival Amnesty: In Search of Black American
    Transitional and Restorative Justice," *Journal of Critical Library
    and Information Studies* 2 (2017).

[^13]: See for example: Barbara L. Craig, "Perimeters with Fences? Or
    Thresholds with Doors? Two Views of a Border," *The American
    Archivist* 66, no. 1 (2003): 96-101; Jeannette Bastian, "Taking
    Custody, Giving Access: A Postcustodial Role for a New Century,"
    *Archivaria* 53 (2002):76-93; and Jeannette Bastian, "A Question of
    Custody: The Colonial Archives of the United States Virgin Islands,"
    *The American Archivist* 64 (2001): 96-114.

[^14]: Anthony Dunbar, "Introducing Critical Race Theory to Archival
    Discourse: Getting The Conversation Started." *Archival Science* 6
    (2006): 115.

[^15]: Michel Foucault, "Of Other Spaces," *Diacritics* 16 (Spring
    1986): 22-27.

[^16]: Benjamin, "Catching Our Breath," 150. See also: Sheila Jasanoff
    and Sang-Hyun Kim, eds. *Dreamscapes of Modernity: Sociotechnical
    Imaginaries and the Fabrication of Power* (Chicago, IL: University
    of Chicago Press, 2015): 4.

[^17]: Noah de Lissovoy, "Conceptualizing the Carceral Turn:
    Neoliberalism, Racism, and Violation," *Critical Sociology* 39, no.
    5 (2012): 739-755.

[^18]: Many government entities have formally revised the language of
    their statutes to offer specific guidance on social media and public
    records.

[^19]: State records, as I am using the term here, are analogous to and
    inclusive of public records and government records.

[^20]: See for example: Alice E. Marwick and danah boyd, "I Tweet
    Honestly, I Tweet Passionately: Twitter Users, Context Collapse, and
    The Imagined Audience," *New Media & Society* 13, no. 1 (2010):
    114-133; Lisa Nakamura and P. Chow-White, eds. *Race After the
    Internet* (New York: Routledge, 2012); and Safiya Umoja Noble and
    Brendesha M. Tynes, eds. *The Intersectional Internet: Race, Sex,
    Class and Culture Online* (New York: Peter Lang Publishing, 2016).

[^21]: See for example: Ryan Pfeil, "Police Utilize Social Media to
    Track Down Sex Offender," Mail Tribune (Medford, OR), December 15,
    2014; and The Associated Press, "Prison for Felon Who Posted Machine
    Gun Photos on Instagram," AP Regional State Report, California, May
    03, 2018.

[^22]: See: National Immigration Law Center, "Untangling the Immigration
    Enforcement Web: Basic Information for Advocates about Databases and
    Information Sharing Among Federal, State,and Local Agencies,"
    (September 2017),
    <https://www.nilc.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/Untangling-Immigration-Enforcement-Web-2017-09.pdf>.

[^23]: Ryan Pfeil, "Police Utilize Social Media to Track Down Sex
    Offender," Mail Tribune (Medford, OR), December 15, 2014.

[^24]: Safiya Umoja Noble, "Critical Surveillance Literacy in Social
    Media: Interrogating Black Death and Dying Online" *Black Camera: An
    International Film Journal* 9, no. 2 (2018): 147.

[^25]: Noble, "Critical Surveillance Literacy," 147.

[^26]: Safiya Umoja Noble calls this phenomenon "the legal right to fear
    Blackness." See: Noble, Safiya Umoja. "Teaching Trayvon: Race,
    Media, and the Politics of Spectacle." *The Black Scholar* 44, No. 1
    (Spring 2014): 12-29.

[^27]: David Lyon, *Surveillance Studies: An Overview* (Cambridge:
    Polity, 2007): 9.

[^28]: Browne, *Dark Matters*, 10.

[^29]: Stephen Spitzer, "The Rationalization of Crime Control in
    Capitalist Society," *Contemporary Crises* 3, no. 1 (1979).

[^30]: Gary Potter, "The History of Policing in the United States,"
    *Police Studies Online*, Eastern Kentucky University,
    <http://plsonline.eku.edu/insidelook/history-policing-united-states-part-1>

[^31]: Michelle Alexander, *The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the
    Age of Colorblindness* (The New Press: New York, 2011):156*-*157.

[^32]: Alexander, *The New Jim Crow*,2.

[^33]: Douglas A Blackmon. *Slavery by Another Name: The Re-Enslavement
    of Black Americans from the Civil War to World War II* (New York:
    Doubleday, 2008).

[^34]: David Pilgrim, *Understanding Jim Crow: Using Racist Memorabilia
    to Teach Tolerance and Promote Social Justice* (PM Press: Oakland,
    2015).

[^35]: For further discussion of the history of the racialized rhetoric
    of law and order, see Michelle Alexander, *The New Jim Crow*, 40-42.

[^36]: Browne, *Dark Matters*, 10.

[^37]: Potter, "History of Policing,"
    <http://plsonline.eku.edu/insidelook/history-policing-united-states-part-1>.

[^38]: See for example the Kids for Cash scandal in Pennsylvania: Eyder
    Peralta, "Pa. Judge Sentenced To 28 Years In Massive Juvenile
    Justice Bribery Scandal," NPR, August 11, 2011,
    <https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2011/08/11/139536686/pa-judge-sentenced-to-28-years-in-massive-juvenile-justice-bribery-scandal>

[^39]: Prison Policy Institute, "Mass Incarceration: The Whole Pie
    2018," <https://www.prisonpolicy.org/reports/pie2018.html>.

[^40]: Lundy Braun, *Breathing Race Into the Machine: The Surprising
    Career of the Spirometer from Plantation to Genetics*, (Minneapolis:
    University of Minnesota Press, 2014).

[^41]: Cathy O'Neil, *Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data
    Increases Inequality and Threatens Democracy* (New York: B/D/W/Y
    Broadway Books, 2017).

[^42]: Data 4 Black Lives, "Data 4 Black Lives Conference,"
    <http://d4bl.org/conference.html>.

[^43]: Pamela M. Casey et al.,  "Using Offender Risk and Needs
    Assessment Information at Sentencing: Guidance for Courts from a
    National Working Group,"  National Center for State Courts, 2011,
    <https://www.ncsc.org/>.

[^44]: Introduced by Senator Chuck Grassley of Iowa, the text of the
    bill can be found here:
    <https://www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/senate-bill/2123>.

[^45]: The United States Department of Justice National Institute of
    Corrections, "Objective Jail Classification Systems: A Guide for
    Jail Administrators,"
    <https://nicic.gov/objective-jail-classification-systems-guide-jail-administrators>

[^46]: United States Congress, "S.2123 Sentencing Reform and Corrections
    Act of 2015,"
    <https://www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/senate-bill/2123>.

[^47]: Department of Homeland Security, "Risk Management Fundamentals:
    Risk Management Doctrine," April 2011,
    <https://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/rma-risk-management-fundamentals.pdf>.

[^48]: Homeland Security, "Risk Management Fundamentals," 21.

[^49]: Department of Homeland Security, "Privacy Impact Assessment
    Update for the Automated Targeting System," January 2017,
    <https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/privacy-pia-cbp006e-ats-april2017.pdf>.

[^50]: Data 4 Black Lives, "Data 4 Black Lives Conference."
    <http://d4bl.org/conference.html>.
