---
author: Susan Brown and Laura Mandell
date: '02.13.18'
shortauthor: Susan Brown and Laura Mandell
shorttitle: 'The Identity Issue: An Introduction'
title: 'The Identity Issue: An Introduction'
---

###### *Clusters: [Gender](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/02/gender/)*

###### *Article DOI: [10.22148/16.020](http://doi.org/10.22148/16.020)*

###### *Journal ISSN: 2371-4549*

 

This special issue of *Cultural Analytics* tackles the urgent question
of how social identities can be addressed through computational methods.
In particular, it probes the extent to which large datasets can be used
to elucidate the kinds of questions that humanities scholars want to ask
about historical and representational processes that structure social
relations and positions. The papers emerge from the work of the Text
Mining the Novel research partnership,[^1] which chose identity as one
of its themes of inquiry. This issue is thus situated at the
intersection of literary studies and sociology, looking outward toward
the novel's construction of ethnicities, genders, class categories, and
racial terminology.

Identity categories have played a role throughout the politics of
modernity in movements associated with class, race, nationalism,
religion, sexuality, and gender. There are significant continuities
between these movements and post-World War II identity politics, not
least in that the latter inherits the highly complex, historically
shifting, and ideologically laden terminology for identities employed in
the former.[^2] What is commonly understood as identity politics,
political movements grounded in self-identification and experiences of
marginalization, emerged most clearly as a practice during the
African-American civil rights agitation of the 1960s in the United
States.[^3] The term itself emerged from the political activism of a
range of groups, most notably of black lesbian feminists who became
conscious of the impact of multiple forms of oppression,[^4] and was
subsequently taken up in academic discourses from the 1980s, including
within literary theory, in debates about "identity." [^5]

During the 1980s, cultural theorists expressed dissatisfaction with
political activism in the name of an "identity" (woman, gay, Black,
lesbian) insofar as it seemed to require "a belief in true essence
\[as\] that which is most irreducible, unchanging, and therefore
constitutive of a given person or thing."[^6] At the same time, the
mainstream feminist movement was under increasing pressure to account
for the situatedness and complexity of gendered experience, particularly
that of racialized or otherwise multiply marginalized subjects, who made
it clear that there was no single unified group called "women."[^7] From
both contexts emerged a series of debates over the extent to which
gender should be understood as socially constructed rather than
essential.

This theoretical introduction focuses on gender identity for several
reasons. First, some of the most fruitful theorizing of identity to date
for the purposes of literary and cultural studies has been of gender
identity, although it has been informed from the outset by perspectives,
debates, and intellectual contributions emerging from the civil rights
and the gay and lesbian liberation movements, and more recently by
critical race studies, post-colonial, and post-human inquiry. Second,
almost all of the work in quantitative computational approaches to
identity in relation to literature has focused on gender, ranging from
Gaye Tuchman and Nina E. Fortin's early sociological work on the
publication of Victorian fiction (1989), through Shlomo Argamon and
colleagues' use of vector analysis to classify French texts by the
gender of their authors (2009), to Katherine Bode's ground-breaking
revision of the history of Australian fiction, which takes up gender in
a nuanced dialogue with nationalism and colonialism in her use of the
AustLit database (2012), and Matt Jockers' mining of novels for gendered
patterns in genre and discourse (2013).[^8] Finally, there has been a
debate amongst feminist scholars in the digital humanities including
Bethany Nowviskie, Lisa Marie Rhody, and Laura Mandell about the
gendered discourse of text mining and its value as a mode of inquiry.
This means that a consideration of gender as a category of analysis and
its relation to methodology is inextricable from an evaluation of
cultural analytics as a field.[^9]

This introduction reviews some of the major interventions in the theory
of feminist identity politics, highlighting as we go those ideas most
relevant to investigating gender categories quantitatively, as a way of
introducing the larger purpose of investigating identities by the
articles gathered together in this issue. We take this deep dive into
the history of gender theory because gender is both a central issue for
some of the contributions to this cluster and is an illuminating case
study for identity issues and quantitative analysis in general. What
follows is a brief overview of the essentialist / constructionist
debates about gender identity as recorded in publication events, best
accomplished out of chronological order, in order to work through what
is at stake in a number of definitional and theoretical matters. The
first essay, from 1990, grounds this overview in practical political
activities before getting theoretically complicated.

 

1990 {#section style="text-align: center;"}
====

In a collection called *Conflicts in Feminism*, Ann Snitow described a
"divide" between "equality" and "difference" feminism.[^10] Snitow
describes the conflict between feminists who see women as equal to men,
on the one hand, and, on the other, feminists who see women as
fundamentally different than men. For equality feminists, "sex hierarchy
\[is\] social, not natural" (Snitow 28). Although Snitow recognized that
"difference feminism" could involve theorizing essential differences
between men and women, or simply cultural differences, she insisted that
"a common divide keeps forming in both feminist thought and action
between the need to build the identity 'woman' and give it solid
political meaning and the need to tear down the very category 'woman'
and dismantle its all-too-solid history" (1). As an activist, Snitow's
"Gender Diary" records the necessity of switching back and forth between
equality and difference to achieve various political goals, but this
paradox of needing both to retain and dispense with identity categories
dogs theory as well as practice.

 

1985 {#section-1 style="text-align: center;"}
====

Toril Moi opened *Sexual/Textual Politics* by faulting the liberal
humanist readings of feminists looking to find "women's experience" in
texts. Writing five years before Snitow, Moi proposed a taxonomy that
anticipates Snitow's in some respects, helping to set the terms for the
debate. She contrasts "equality" or "liberal feminism" with "difference
feminism" in which "Women reject the male symbolic order in the name of
difference. Radical feminism. Femininity extolled." But Moi's model
incorporated a third position via Julia Kristeva, bringing French
feminism and deconstructive modes of reading into the picture: "Women
reject the dichotomy between masculine and feminine as
metaphysical."[^11] Binary oppositions generate meaning through
difference from each other, not through reference to physical reality,
and so in that sense, the gender dichotomy is "metaphysical," but she
also means "metaphysical" in the sense of providing presence and origin
(Moi 119). The invocation of "difference" in feminist theory influenced
by European philosophy draws on structuralist linguistic and
anthropological insights that meaning is generated through difference,
for instance that "woman" is not "man," and Derridean notions of
"différance" or the deferral of meaning: both resonances stressed a lack
of intrinsic essence or truth. Moi describes in detail the feminism of
Hélène Cixous as combining a notion of diacritical "difference" with the
Derridean "différance" which goes beyond merely the "critique of binary
logic" to the critique of presence in written (and even spoken) words:
language does not provide presence but defers it (Moi 104-109); to
repeat a famous axiom of French feminism, "The woman does not
exist."[^12]

 

1989 {#section-2 style="text-align: center;"}
====

In her book *Essentially Speaking* (1989), Diana Fuss laid out the
"essence versus difference" theoretical models for understanding
identity that proliferated during the 1980s: "essentialism is typically
defined in opposition to difference"; it is "a complex system of
cultural, social, psychical, and historical differences, and not a set
of pre-existent human essences, \[that\] position and constitute the
subject" (xii). Here, "difference" is used to mean that identities are
generated only through the Western European white male hegemonic
activity of differentiating self from Other as formulated variously by
Hegel, Freud, Sartre,[^13] Beauvoir, Lacan,[^14] and Derrida.[^15]

In her first chapter, Fuss classifies identity theorists as either
essentialists or constructionists: \"while the essentialist holds that
the natural is *repressed* by the social, the constructionist maintains
that the natural is *produced* by the social\" [^16]. She articulates
the conflict between these two camps in the chapter called "Identity
Politics":

> Is politics based on identity, or is identity based on politics? Is
> identity a natural, political, historical, psychical, or linguistic
> construct? What implications does the deconstruction of "identity"
> have for those who espouse an identity politics? Can feminist, gay, or
> lesbian subjects afford to dispense with the notion of unified, stable
> identities or must we begin to base our politics on something other
> than identity? What, in other words, is the politics of "identity
> politics"? (Fuss, *Essentially Speaking, *100.)

In *Concepts of the Self*, Anthony Elliott quotes this passage and
argues that Fuss's critique "shaped the politics of subversion advocated
by queer theorists."[^17] The group "Queer Nation" emerged alongside the
gay liberation movement as an alternative political mode of activism
that did not require investing in "identity."[^18] As Michael Warner
puts it in his introduction to a special issue of *Social Text*
published in 1991, "Fear of a Queer Planet," queer politics in contrast
to gay identity politics "partially disarticulat\[es\] itself from other
kinds of identity politics, and partially from the frame of identity
politics itself."[^19] Lesbian and gay assertions of a distinct and
different identity participate in the social marginalization against
which they protest: it allows dispensing with homoerotic desire by
designating it as belonging to someone else "over there" (and doing so
with violence, in the case of projection).[^20] In contrast, "queer"
takes on global proportions insofar as it names not a separate group but
something uncannily ordinary. Rather than protesting against historical
marginalization as lesbian and gay activists have done, and in the
process enacting what Wendy Brown calls a "wounded attachment" to the
past,[^21] queer political action performs queer centrality to the
nation or the globe (Abelove, *Deep Gossip* 40, 45-46). Queer activism
and theory attempt to "dispense with the notion of unified, stable
identities" in order to avoid self-marginalization. By insisting that
queerness is essential to American identity, not peripheral to it, queer
theory calls into question the value of defining any identity at all.

 

1984 {#section-3 style="text-align: center;"}
====

In a much cited and reprinted interview first published in an Australian
journal, Gayatri Spivak admonished her "positivist feminist colleagues,"
warning them "that essentialism is a trap" too easy to fall into when
theorizing identity. Work that is concerned with retrieving "the voice"
of non-elite colonized subjects, she argued, needs to be read from
within but against the grain . . . . \[T\]he project to retrieve the
subaltern consciousness \[should be read as\] the attempt to undo a
massive historiographic metalepsis and "situate" the effect of the
subject as subaltern. I would read it, then, as a strategic use of
positivist essentialism in a scrupulously visible political
interest.[^22]

The goal is to acknowledge the subjective effects of belonging to an
identity constituted historically through oppression without believing
that the identity itself exists independently of those historical
conditions. The phrase "strategic essentialism" took off in a way that
Spivak herself had not anticipated. She defines strategic essentialism
most clearly in a later interview as "the strategic use of an essence as
a mobilizing slogan or masterword like woman, or worker, or the name of
any nation that you would like . . . ." Spivak adds that she regrets
having launched the concept since it is so often used as an "alibi": she
would rather that cultural theorists investigate "how ourselves and
others are . . . essentialist, without claiming a counter-essence
disguised under the alibi of a strategy."[^23] That is, cultural
theorists analyzing identity participate in essentializing, no matter
what disclaimers introduce their work.

Three features of Spivak's intervention are important here, both to
subsequent debates within cultural studies and to our concern with
quantitative analysis: first, the connection she makes between identity
essentialists and positivists; second, the idea that the essentialism of
identity categories cannot just be forsworn in any simple way by a
cultural theorist; and third, the problem of history. To elaborate on
the third: how can a cultural critic counteract the elision of
non-dominant histories, history as the history of the winners ("massive
historiographic metalepsis"), without essentializing identities? How
does one study the history of woman, or even women, without using the
category of woman to mean something consistent through time (s.a. Fuss
3-4)?

It might seem as though categorizing "man" and "woman" for the sake of
quantitative analysis *necessarily* participates in a kind of "naïve
empiricism" according to which such categories are self-evidently
referential.[^24] Joan Scott explicitly decries numerical analyses in
"Gender: A Useful Category of Historical Analysis" (1986) [^25]
accepting M/F as quantities (1 and 2) would mean accepting the idea that
gender can be distinguished based on "the single variable of physical
difference" [^26]; it would undermine feminism's necessary "refusal of
the fixed and permanent quality of the binary opposition, a genuine
historicization and deconstruction of the terms of sexual difference"
[^27]. However, one way to analyze the various attributes accorded to a
gender that is reconstructed throughout history is to search through
large amounts of data using that very binary category-that is,
investigating "the origins and consequences" of the social category of
the gender binary and its surrounding practices.[^28] Deborah Verhoeven
has commented that Scott's notion of gender as an analytic category
paves the way for scaling up historical inquiries.[^29] In "A Sociology
of Quantification," Wendy Espeland and Mitchell Stevens argue that
quantification is a mode of "commensuration" that "creates a special
type of relationship among objects": it "unites objects by encompassing
them under a shared cognitive system."[^30] The process of
commensuration requires first creating the "objects" to be classified,
and insofar as quantitative analysis can be used to find historically
situated attributes of social classifications, it can give us a clue
about "shared cognitive systems" of the past. As Donna Haraway puts it,
"'Gender' was developed as a category to explore what counts as a
'woman,' to problematize the previously taken for granted."[^31] Gender
analysis--determining what has been counted as feminine and masculine
through time--can go hand in hand with quantitative analysis.

That cultural analytics can historicize gender can be seen in this
issue, for instance in the article by Ted Underwood, David Bamman, and
Sabrina Lee. They track sorting according to binary gender categories in
novels published over 170 years, arguing that, as time goes on,
characters' actions and attributes are less strongly marked by gender.
And, in the case of racial and ethnic identities, Mark Algee-Hewitt,
J.D. Porter, and Hannah Walser track the migration of identifying
features from one identity to another, as well as those that "stick," in
novels published over the course of 130 years.

Critics have suggested that the theoretical sophistication of these
essays may not be typical in the field of Digital Humanities (DH).
Miriam Posner argues that the radical potential of DH is unrealized
precisely because "most of the data and data models we've inherited deal
with structures of power, like gender and race, with a crudeness that
would never pass muster in a peer-reviewed humanities publication."[^32]
She highlights the crudeness of census data using Martin Schoeller's
*National Geographic* project "The Changing Faces of America" in which
clicking on a photographic image of a person leads to a juxtaposition of
the complex and often multiple categories with which they identify
themselves, and the census box that they check.[^33] Nevertheless one
can find more nuanced use of models within fields such as the natural
and social sciences where statistics have been absorbed in a range of
methodologies. As Katherine Bode puts it,

> While \[the humanist's\] sense of numbers as an imperfect and mediated
> representation might not be the exact way they are discussed in the
> sciences, no scientist approaches statistics as neutral, true and
> infallible. Awareness of the way scientists interrogate - rather than
> simply accept or promote - statistical measures is often lacking in
> current humanities' debate about quantitative approaches and their
> ideological resonances.(Bode, *Reading by Numbers*, 12-13.)

Statisticians well know that their results reflect categorization
effects, a difficulty compounded when the categories in question are
identities. The apparently incidental effects of the procedures of
quantitative analysis must be subjected to critical scrutiny, as in an
essay included in this issue: Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, Yuancheng Zhu
interrogate sequence alignment tools derived from genomics and
bioinformatics in the course of investigating how novels articulate
racial identities and relations. What emerges from that two-pronged
inquiry is both the limits of the algorithm from a Critical Race Studies
perspective, and the extent to which normative literary history has also
tended to reify racial differences.

 

1991 {#section-4 style="text-align: center;"}
====

Further challenges to simplistic models of identity have emerged from
the study of intersectionality. Emanating from a landmark essay by
Kimberlé Crenshaw, "Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity
Politics, and Violence against Women of Color," that appeared in the
*Stanford Law Review* in 1991,[^34] the "intersectionality theory"
promoted by mixed-methods sociologists faults quantitative analyses that
organize data at the outset according to discrete identity categories
without investigating the ways in which they overlap and inflect each
other. Intersectionality, Erez Levon tells us, is grounded in "the
belief that no one category (e.g., 'woman' or 'lesbian') is sufficient
to account for individual experience or behavior."[^35] While research
in intersectionality often requires a mixed methods approach
(qualitative and quantitative), cultural analytics can be used to
investigate multiple identity categories. In this issue, Elizabeth Evans
and Matthew Wilkens examine how ethnicity and national origin are
intertwined with genre and geography. Additionally, insofar as they
prepare the way for identities to be multiplied using their data and
methods, Evans and Wilkens may be seen to engage in intersectional
inquiry.

 

1988 {#section-5 style="text-align: center;"}
====

An interesting feature of quantitative versus qualitative debates in
sociology is the emphasis among mixed-methods researchers on "giving
voice" to the subjects of their studies.[^36] Spivak's landmark essay,
"Can the Subaltern Speak?" (1988) delineates how difficult a project
that might be, perhaps above and beyond what most sociologists might
assume.[^37] But insofar as their methods involve actually speaking with
the subjects of sociological analysis, the project is not possible in
any obvious way for literary historians. There are, however, things that
can be done (and here we circle back to the third issue raised by Spivak
in her 1985 discussion of "strategic essentialism" and elaborated in
"Can the Subaltern Speak?") to avoid the elision of non-dominant
histories. Among the articles in this Identity issue of *Cultural
Analytics*, several might be said to open up alternative histories of
historically marginalized groups. Evans and Wilkins demonstrate that
outsider novelists, foreign to British soil, engaged in colonial and
anti-colonial critique of modernist internationalism through the greater
use, and greater abstraction, of geographical terminology. Matt Erlin,
Lynne Tatlock, Douglas Knox, and Stephen Pentecost demonstrate among
readers from the U.S. midwest a resistance to reading only those novels
that target specific genders. And Kraicer and Piper demonstrate in
recent Anglophone novels the under-representation of women characters
and the privileging of heteronormativity.

 

2000 {#section-6 style="text-align: center;"}
====

Paula Moya and Michael Hamer-García's 2000 anthology *Reclaiming
Identity* (see footnote 5) provides a treasure-trove of methodological
resources and examples for investigating identities with the
"post-positivist realist" approach pioneered by Satya Mohanty.[^38]
Linda Alcoff argues that identity studies is only positivistic insofar
as its insights are claimed to be more than provisional:

> Ontologies can be thought of as models of reality useful in science
> (or in social theory) that approximate the world as it is, thus
> capturing some truth about it, without enjoying a one-to-one
> correspondence with categories of entities as they exist completely
> independently of human languages or human practices. (Alcoff, "Who's
> Afraid of Identity Politics?" 316.)

The NovelTM group therefore offers these investigations as provisional,
expandable, re-workable with modified or other categories, taxonomies,
and ontologies.

 

2017 {#section-7 style="text-align: center;"}
====

Despite the risks, there is something to be said about the particular
value of quantitative analysis for retrieving marginalized or silenced
histories as well as understanding their continued marginalization into
the present. In *Deep Gossip* (2003), Henry Abelove describes the
continuity between gay liberation histories and queer politics: if the
latter is intent upon destabilizing identity categories, he argues, some
of the historical work on gay identity in fact leads the way: it is
"just a step," he argues, "from historicizing to destabilizing."[^39]
One particular feature of doing history at scale is that it allows
taking more, and more ephemera, into account. As Bode puts it,

> quantitative methods allow us to explore aspects of the literary
> field, especially trends and patterns, broad developments and
> directions, that would otherwise remain unrepresented and
> unrepresentable. (Bode, *Reading by Numbers,*13.)

It may be that numbers, if  understood as not transparently readable,
can provide another method for "giving voice." The NovelTM group has
embraced the challenge to devise better methods for addressing social
identities and power dynamics. So, for example, in "Crossing Over:
Gendered Reading Formations at the Muncie Public Library, 1891-1902,"
Erlin et al. combine text mining with borrower records and a history of
institutions (book market and libraries) in order to provide a
dialectical account of the social and institutional forces that push
readers toward gender normative texts as well as how readers push back
through book selection.

Historicizing helps to destabilize identities, and cultural analytics
can make visible a kind of history that we have never seen before. The
analysis of literary texts, whether as objects of consumption or through
their textuality, introduces another fruitful layer of complexity that
stresses the extent to which identity is always already mediated. In the
case of literary investigation, quantitative analysis can engage with
and unpack the discursive construction of identities in novels.

Three of the essays in this issue, all mentioned briefly above, deal
with racial and ethnic identities. In "Computational Method and the
Critique of Race: Racial Difference and the US Novel at Scale,
1880-2000," Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu take up the
call, made recently by Roopika Risam, Kim Gallon, Amy Earhart, Lauren
Klein, and others, to develop a form of computational criticism and
distant reading that is commensurable with the methods and arguments of
Critical Race Studies.[^40] The essay takes as its assumption that
scientific and quantitative methods often reify race and support racial
stratification (eugenics, the Bell Curve, etc.). Thus, any "big data" or
computational method applied to racial minority authors and texts is in
great peril of simply reproducing reified and problematic views of
racial identity. So, Long, and Zhu argue that canonical methods in
textual analytics - specifically, sequence alignment - can be
productively deformed and reconstructed through an attention to the
critique of race not only to produce new "large scale" views of cultural
and literary history, but also to advance the work of critique by
challenging the assumptions of the algorithm itself. They combine theory
and close reading with sequence alignment analysis to critique the
racial homogeneity and universalism nominally supported by the method of
sequence alignment , through a case study focused on the modern American
novel and the question of racial difference. A new story about racial
difference and the US novel emerges from testing the limits of the
algorithm, which are often the limits of normative literary history
itself. That is, a creative use of computation, animated by critique,
draws attention to what has been written out of literary history, while
at the same time advancing the work of racial critique.

In "Representing Race and Ethnicity in American Fiction: 1789-1920,"
Mark Algee-Hewitt, J.D. Porter, and Hannah Walser explore the
relationship between the novel and the discourses of identity that have
shaped the understanding of ethnicity, race and ancestry in America. The
authors use a combination of collocate analysis and word embeddings on a
corpus of over 18,300 novels written between 1789 and 1920 to identify
the terms that cluster with distinct markers of racial and ethnic
identity over time. Through these methods, they are able to assess the
'stickiness' of identity markers: how certain terms remained clustered
with particular identities and how others moved in concert between
subsequent waves of immigrant groups. Their project not only permits the
exploration of how and when certain discourses of identity solidified in
the imagination of the reading public, but also how literature itself
shaped the American concepts of race and ethnicity. This article deploys
race as an analytic category, showing identity categories in the making
as races and ethnicities are discursively endowed with specific
attributes. Algee-Hewitt, Porter, and Walser thus historicize race and
ethnicity in demonstrating the extent to which identities are
continually shifting and trading their discursive markers.

Elizabeth Evans and Matthew Wilkens's contribution, "Nation, Ethnicity,
and the Geography of British Fiction, 1880-1940" draws on four distinct,
substantial collections of British literature published in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries to assess the applicability of
existing critical claims about modernist internationalism to large runs
of the period's fiction and trace the complex interplay of insider and
outsider status in writing by authors born outside the UK. They find
that, within a framework of broad continuity, the decades leading up to
the Second World War saw increasing literary attention to locations
beyond Britain's borders, but a drop in the overall rate at which named
locations appeared, shifts they attribute to forces cultural, political,
and aesthetic. Evans and Wilkens show that foreign writers favored an
especially geographically intensive style that drew more heavily on
abstractions than on the details of setting, which, they argue, was
linked to such authors' greater engagement with the era's colonial and
anticolonial politics. Beyond its specific inquiries, the article
describes a set of broadly applicable methods for analyzing textual
geography at scale and provides a rich dataset for other scholars
studying what the authors call the "long modernist era."\
Two articles in this special issue emphasize that quantitative methods
can be used as, or with, linguistic and literary analysis, mirroring the
mixed methods approach advocated by social scientists. In their
contribution, "Self-Repetition and East Asian Literary Modernity,
1900-1930," Hoyt Long, Anatoly Detwyler, and Yuancheng Zhu approach
identity as it relates to the construction of a modern narrative voice
characterized by psychic interiority and a vernacular style.
Specifically, they analyze linguistic redundancy as a constitutive
feature of literary self-identity in early 20th-century Japanese and
Chinese fiction. Using measures of information and diversity in diction
combined with other simple textual features, they find a tendency toward
repetition in self-referential or psychologically oriented narratives
and argue for its role as conscious stylistic innovation within East
Asian literary modernity. This finding, which holds across distinct, but
interrelated national literary contexts, shows how quantitative methods
can contribute to translingual comparison. It also offers an opportunity
to reflect on the longer history of linguistic measures of redundancy,
in particular their origins in mid-century psycholinguistics as indexes
of mental aberration. Long, Detwyler, and Zhu's approach to history is a
reminder of how intertwined is the relation of measurement to knowledge
of the psychological self, and of how embedded this relation is in ideas
about language.

"Crossing Over: Gendered Reading Formations at the Muncie Public
Library, 1891-1902," by Matt Erlin, Lynne Tatlock, Douglas Knox, and
Stephen Pentecost interweaves thick description (literary analysis) with
a consideration of broad social patterns, providing a finely-grained
consideration of gender-normative reading in nineteenth-century Muncie,
Indiana. They examine intra- and extra-textual pressures that impinged
upon reader choice in the period in order to discuss "crossover" and
"convergent" reading practices. "Crossover reading" is the reading by
the non-targeted gender of overtly gender-targeted fiction that was
otherwise most frequently read, as intended, by persons of the targeted
gender. "Convergent reading" refers to the selection of
fiction[---]{.emdash}not overtly specified to gender, e.g., as "books
for women" or "books for men"[---]{.emdash}by persons of either gender
at similar rates relative to the respective gender group. The
traditional analytic categories of gender-convergent and
gender-crossover reading actually break down in the case of novels by
Horatio Alger that combine elements typical of books geared toward one
gender of reader or another. This insight only emerges as a result of
placing aggregate borrowing patterns in dialogue with text-mining
techniques designed to find novelistic features typed by gender,
analyzing simultaneously literary qualities and statistical patterns.
Additionally, Erlin, Tatlock, Knox, and Pentecost offer a situated
understanding of gender; their article performs gender trouble through
its investigation of crossover reading and the crossover textuality of
Horatio Alger.

Two other essays in this issue also deal with gender as an analytic
category. Relatively fixed and fluid forms of identity rub shoulders in
an essay about gender by Ted Underwood, David Bamman, and Sabrina Lee.
In a familiar, social-scientific mode, this essay tells a story about
the shifting demographic balance of English-language fiction. Peering
through this lens, signs of progress are hard to discern. Men
increasingly outnumber women in the period 1850-1970, whether we
consider the grammatical gender of characters or the names of authors.
Changes at the end of the twentieth century only seem to restore a
nineteenth-century status quo. But this essay also uses machine learning
to consider shifting perspectives on gender itself. A perspectival
approach to the topic reveals a more progressive arc: as we move from
the nineteenth century through the twentieth, the actions and attributes
of characters are less strongly sorted into binary gender categories.
Perspectival analysis even reveals how the concepts of gender that
organize characterization may be be inflected by the gender
identification of the author. As mentioned above, this article
demonstrates the changing construction of gender through time.

Eve Kraicer and Andrew Piper's essay, "Socializations: Gender, Genre,
and the Social Networks of the Contemporary Novel," begins in many ways
where Underwood et al. leave off. Their dataset starts after 2005,
allowing insights into the gendered nature of character in the
contemporary novel. At the same time, Kraicer and Piper's focus on the
hierarchical positioning of gender within the novel's social networks
offers further insight into the social reality presented within novels,
what they identify as a key form of "socialization." Where Underwood et
al. identify the declining semantic differentiation between men and
women in novels, Kraicer and Piper's work highlights the way such
de-gendering of the novel's diegetic universe is offset by the
persistence of very clear gender hierarchies. Using a collection of ca.
1,300 contemporary novels in English drawn from seven different genres,
Kraicer and Piper show how recent anglophone novels uniformly
under-represent women characters, regardless of either genre or author
gender. Additionally, these novels manifest a decided orientation
towards depicting heterosexual relationships. Taken together, we see two
forms of patriarchy being expressed in the English language novel today:
the relative absence of one gender and a heteronormative sociability on
the other. These insights hold across a broad range of novels from
popular genre fiction like romance or mysteries to more up-market works
that have received literary prizes or been reviewed in the New York
Times.

For Kraicer and Piper, computational methods are important because they
allow for a larger-scale understanding of the way gendered identities
are not only constructed within contemporary fiction but also socially
positioned. This social organization of gender conveys powerful facts
about how readers are themselves "socialized" through contemporary novel
reading. They see their work as a direct response to calls by feminist
scholars to draw attention to "processes and possibilities of social and
cultural transformation." [^41] Knowledge of such hierarchies of
(in)visibility provide in their view an important basis for a form of
cultural advocacy that would seek to undo the fictional realities that
potentially inform everyday norms.[^42]

All of these essays thus represent contributions to their specific
fields of inquiry, but also a rich set of efforts to advance our
understanding of what it means to mobilize identity categories within
large-scale computational analysis of literary phenomena. The data
modelling this work requires necessarily engages in both abstraction and
reduction, but the very act of modelling carries with it the seeds of a
constructionist recognition that a phenomenon could be modelled
differently, and as a number of the essays show, conjoining diverse
categories or pluralizing the modes of inquiry can reveal the dynamic
and contingent nature of identity categories. At the same time, however,
and as the debates surveyed all too briefly above indicate, these
categories are easily reified because they readily map onto categories
that have been and still often are considered fixed and essential, and
that do real, politically charged work in the world.

This debate is increasingly pressing of late, with a rise in critical
attention being given to methodology within the digital humanities more
generally. Alan Liu considers ours an infrastructure moment, and his
call for "critical infrastructure studies"[^43] has further focused the
vigorous discussion of the underlying conditions of digital humanities
practices. This includes heightened scrutiny of the politics of digital
humanities infrastructures ranging from the institutional ones that
embed and perpetuate structural inequalities to the tools and techniques
employed in the kind of work promoted by *Cultural Analytics* which, as
Lauren Klein has observed, "also derive from flaws in cultural and
conceptual structures" of the kind we have explored above at length in
the conundrum of how to mobilize categories related to gender*.*[^44]
Catherine D'Ignazio and Klein, working from a feminist ethical and
theoretical position, for instance, call for a very high standard for
data visualization that not only takes on the conceptual matter of
binary categories on which we have focused here, but also brings in
other important considerations including perspective, embodiment and
affect, and transparency with respect to provenance and labour
associated with datasets.[^45] The commitment of the NovelTM group to
transparency with regard to the provenance of datasets, and to making
those datasets available for the evaluation and reproducibility of the
work presented here, as well as the basis for further work, is a
contribution over and above that of the particular results. Documenting
and archiving datasets is not trivial work, nor is it typically
rewarded. The datasets made available in connection with this work
contribute to establishing a crucial infrastructure for the
investigation of cultural identities using digital humanities methods,
including of recent texts that cannot circulate freely.[^46] As Klein
argues, "it may very well be that a distant view that is trained on
power, and that is self-reflexive about the forces that enable
it--cultural and conceptual as well as computational­-can contribute
significantly to the project of dismantling structural power."[^47] The
contributions clustered here will enable the ongoing debate over how
cultural analytics can engage ethically and convincingly with thorny
questions of identity to proceed productively on the basis of both
theory and practice.

::: {.printfriendly .pf-alignright}
[](# "Printer Friendly, PDF & Email"){.noslimstat}
:::

[^1]: The Text Mining the Novel project is led by Andrew Piper at McGill
    University and funded by a Partnership Grant from the Social
    Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. See
     [http://www.noveltm.ca](http://www.noveltm.ca/).

[^2]: Linda J. Nicholson, *Identity before Identity Politics*
    (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008).

[^3]: Craig Calhoun, *Social Theory and the Politics of Identity* (New
    York, Wiley, 1994).

[^4]: The coining of the phrase "identity politics" is attributed to the
    famous statement of the Combahee River Collective from 1977.
    Reprinted as  "The Combahee River Collective Statement" in *Home
    Girls: A Black Feminist Anthology*, ed. Barbara Smith (New York:
    Kitchen Table/Women of Color Press, 1983), 264-274. See Michelle
    Murphy, *Seizing the Means of Reproduction: Entanglements of
    Feminism, Health, and Technoscience* (Durham, NC: Duke University
    Press, 2012), 39; and T. David Mason, "Ethnicity and Politics," in
    *Encyclopedia of Government and Politics,* ed.  Mary E. Hawkesworth
    and Maurice Kogan (Taylor & Francis US, 2004, 568-586.

[^5]: A comprehensive bibliography is available in Jodi Dean,
    *Solidarity of Strangers: Feminism After Identity Politics*
    (Berkeley, CA: U of CA P, 1996); cited in Paula Moya,
    "Introduction," *Reclaiming Identity: Realist Theory and the
    Predicament of Postmodernism*, ed. Paula Moya, Michael Hames-García
    (Berkeley: U of California P, 2000), 1-26.

[^6]: Diana Fuss, *Essentially Speaking: Feminism, Nature, and
    Difference* (New York: Routledge, 1989), 2.

[^7]: See, for instance, Gloria T. Hull, Patricia Bell Scott, and
    Barbara Smith, *All the women are white, all the men are black, but
    some of us are brave* (New York: Feminist P, 1982).

[^8]: Gaye Tuchman and Nina Fortin, *Edging Women Out: Victorian
    Novelists, Publishers and Social Change* (New Haven: Yale, 1989).
    Shlomo Argamon, Jean-Baptiste Goulain, Russell Horton, and Mark
    Olsen, "Vive la Différence! Text Mining Gender Difference in French
    Literature," *Digital Humanities Quarterly* 3.2 (2009). Katherine
    Bode, *Reading by Numbers: Recalibrating the Literary Field* (New
    York: Anthem Press, 2012). See also: Matt Jockers, *Macroanalysis*
    (Urbana: U of Illinois P, 2013); Jan Rybicki, \"*Vive la
    différence*: Tracing the (Authorial) Gender Signal by Multivariate
    Analysis of Word Frequencies,\" *Digital Scholarship in the
    Humanities* (2015): 1-16; Mark Olsen, \"*Écriture feminine*:
    Searching for an Indefinable Practice?\" *Literary and Linguistic
    Computing* 20 suppl. (2005): 147-64; Mark Olsen, \"Qualitative
    Linguistics and *Histoire des Mentalités*: Gender Representation in
    the *Trésor de la Langue Française*,\" *QALICO* (14 January 1992);
    Andrew Piper and Richard Jean So, "Women Write About Family, Men
    Write About War," *The New Republic* April 8,
    2016: <https://newrepublic.com/article/132531/women-write-family-men-write-war>.

[^9]: Bethany Nowviskie, "What Do Girls Dig?" *Debates in Digital
    Humanities*, ed. Matthew K. Gold (Minneapolis, U of Minnesota Press,
    2012); Lisa Marie Rhody, "Why I Dig: Feminist Approaches to Text
    Analysis," in *Debates in Digital Humanities*, ed. Matthew K. Gold
    and Lauren Klein (Minneapolis: U of Minnesota Press, 2016); Laura
    Mandell, "Gender and Cultural Analytics: Finding or Making
    Stereotypes?" *Debates in Digital Humanities* (Minneapolis: U of
    Minnesota Press, forthcoming 2018). The continuing debate is
    apparent in a number of the recent considerations of "distant
    reading" in *PMLA* 132.3 (2017).

[^10]: Ann Snitow, "A Gender Diary," in *Conflicts in Feminism*, ed.
    Marianne Hirsch, Evelyn Fox Keller (New York: Routledge, 1990),
    9-43.

[^11]: Toril Moi, *Sexual / Textual Politics: Feminist Literary Theory*
    (New York: Methuen, 1985), 12.

[^12]: From Juliet Mitchell, Jacqueline Rose, ed. and introduction,
    *Feminine Sexuality*, eds. Juliet Mitchell and Jacqueline Rose,
    trans. Juliet Mitchell (New York: Norton, 1982), 72.

[^13]: Linda Martín Alcoff, "Who's Afraid of Identity Politics?" in
    Moya, Hames-García, eds., 312-344, the section title "A Genealogy of
    the Problem," pp. 325-34.

[^14]: Stephen Heath, "Difference," *Screen* 19.3 (1978): 51-112;
    Alcoff, 329; Fuss, 6-12.

[^15]: Fuss, *Essentially Speaking,*12-19.

[^16]: Fuss, *Essentially Speaking, *3

[^17]: Anthony Elliott, *Concepts of the Self* (Malden, MA: Polity P,
    2008), 132.

[^18]: Henry Abelove, "From Thoreau to Queer Politics," *Yale Journal of
    Criticism* 6.2 (1993): 17-27. Rpt. in *Deep Gossip* (Minneapolis,
    MN: U of Minnesota P, 2003), 29-41. For use of the term "queer," see
    Lisa Duggan, "Making it Perfectly Queer," *Socialist Review* 22.1
    (1992): 11-31. See also David M. Halperin, "The Normalization of
    Queer Theory," *Journal of Homosexuality* 45.2-4 (2003): 339-343.

[^19]: Michael Warner, "Introduction: Fear of a Queer Planet," *Social
    Text* 29 (1991): 3-17, 11.

[^20]: Possibly the first article to express concerns about the danger
    of demarcating "gay identity" is Henry Abelove's "Freud, Male
    Homosexuality, and the Americas," first published in 1985-6, and
    subsequently reprinted in *Deep Gossip*, 1-20.

[^21]: Wendy Brown, *States of Injury: Power and Freedom in Late
    Modernity* (Princeton, NY: Princeton UP, 1995), 66-76, cited in
    Moya, Introduction, 8.

[^22]: Gayatri Spivak, *In Other Worlds: Essays in Cultural Politics*
    (New York: Methuen, 1987), 205. Rpt. of an earlier interview with
    Elizabeth Grosz, "Criticism, Feminism and the Institution," *Thesis
    Eleven* 10/11 (1984-85): 175-88.  (Rpt. also Gayatri Spivak,
    *Postcolonial Critic,* ed. Sarah Harasym (New York: Routledge,
    1990), 1-16).

[^23]: "In a Word," interview with Ellen Rooney, 1988. In *The Essential
    Difference*, ed. Naomi Schor and Elizabeth Weed (Bloomington:
    Indiana UP, 1994), p. 151-184. Rpt. in *Contemporary Literary
    Criticism*, ed. Jeffrey W. Hunter, vol. 233 (Detroit: Gale, 2007).

[^24]: "The desire for 'truth' or 'objective' knowledge" about
    identities, Paula Moya writes, is seen by postmodernists "as resting
    on a naively representational theory of language that relies on the
    following mistaken assumptions: first, that there is a one-to-one
    correspondence between signs and their extralinguistic real-world
    referents; and second, that some kind of intrinsic meaning dwells in
    those real-world referents, independent of human thought or action."
    (Moya, Introduction, 5).

[^25]: Joan W. Scott, "Gender: A Useful Category of Historical
    Analysis," *The American Historical Review* 91.5 (1986): 1053-1075.

[^26]: Scott, "Gender," 1059.

[^27]: Scott, "Gender," 1065.

[^28]: Geoffrey C. Bowker, Susan Leigh Star, *Sorting Things Out:
    Classification and Its Consequences* (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
    1999), 5. Bowker and Star see this work as an archeology in the
    Foucauldian sense of the word.

[^29]: Discussion preceding a panel at the Digital Humanities 2016
    conference: see Brown, S., Clement, T., Mandell, L., Verhoeven, D.,
    Wernimont, J., "Creating Feminist Infrastructure in the Digital
    Humanities." In *Digital Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts*.
    Jagiellonian University & Pedagogical University, Kraków (2016),
    47-50.

[^30]: Wendy Espeland, Mitchell Stevens, "A Sociology of
    Quantification," *European Journal of Sociology* 49.3 (2008):
    401-36; 408.

[^31]: Donna Haraway, "Gender for a Marxist Dictionary: the Sexual
    Politics of a Word." In *Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: the
    Reinvention of Nature*. London: Free Association Books, 1991. Rpt.
    in *Women, Gender, Religion: a Reader*, ed. Elizabeth A. Castelli.
    NY: Palgrave, 2001. 49-75, 67.

[^32]: Miriam Posner, \"[What's Next: The Radical, Unrealized Potential
    of Digital
    Humanities](http://miriamposner.com/blog/whats-next-the-radical-unrealized-potential-of-digital-humanities/).\"
    *Miriam Posner's Blog* 27 (2015). See also James English,
    \"Everywhere and Nowhere: The Sociology of Literature After 'the
    Sociology of Literature,\"' *New Literary History* 41.2 (2010): v-
    xxiii.

[^33]: Martin Schoeller, \"[The Changing Faces of
    America](http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/2013/10/changing-faces/schoeller-photography),\"* National
    Geographic,* October 2013.

[^34]: Kimberlé Crenshaw, *Stanford Law Review*, Vol. 43, No. 6 (Jul.,
    1991): 1241-1299.

[^35]: Erez Levon, "Integrating Intersectionality in Language, Gender,
    and Sexuality Research," *Language and Linguistics Compass* 9/7
    (2015): 295-308, 295.

[^36]: For an overview, see Yvonne Lincoln, Susan Lynham, Egon Guba,
    "Paradigmatic Controversies, Contradictions, and Emerging
    Confluences, Revisited," in *The Sage Handbook of Qualitative
    Research*, 5th edition (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publishing, 2017):
    108-150; 124, 130, 132.

[^37]: Gayatri Spivak, "Can the Subaltern Speak?" originally published
    in *Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture*, ed. Cary Nelson,
    Lawrence Grossberg (Urbana, IL: U of Illinois P, 1988), 67-111.

[^38]: Satya P. Mohanty, *Literary Theory and the Claims of History:
    Postmodernism, Objectivity, Multicultural Politics* (Ithaca: Cornell
    University Press, 1997); "Colonial Legacies, Multicultural Futures:
    Relativism, Objectivity, and the Challenge of Otherness," *PMLA*
    110.1 (1995): 108-18.

[^39]: Abelove, *Deep Gossip, *54.

[^40]: Roopika Risam, "Beyond the Margins: Intersectionality and the
    Digital Humanities," *DHQ* 9.2 (2015), "Navigating the Global
    Digital Humanities: Insights from Black Feminism," *Debates in
    Digital Humanities*, ed. Matthew K. Gold, Lauren Klein (Minneapolis,
    MN: U of Minnesota P, 2016); Kim Gallon, \"Making a Case for the
    Black Digital Humanities, *Debates in Digital Humanities*, ed.
    Matthew K. Gold, Lauren Klein (Minneapolis, MN: U of Minnesota P,
    2016); Amy Earhart, "Can Information be Unfettered? Race and the New
    Digital Humanities Canon," *Debates in Digital Humanities*, ed.
    Matthew K. Gold, Lauren Klein (Minneapolis, MN: U of Minnesota P,
    2012), 309-18; Lauren Klein, "The Image of Absence: Archival
    Science, Data Visualization, and James Hemings," *American
    Literature* 85.4 (2013): 661-88.

[^41]: Alexis Lothian and Amanda Phillips, "Can Digital Humanities Mean
    Transformative Critique?" *E-Media Studies* 3.1 (2013):
    DOI:[10.1349/PS1.1938-6060.A.425](http://dx.doi.org/10.1349/PS1.1938-6060.A.425)

[^42]: For a discussion of the way "cultural processes" mediate between
    large-scale social effects and individual cognitive processes that
    rely on schemas and tokenization, see Michèle Lamont, Stefan
    Beljean, and Matthew Clair, "What is Missing? Cultural Processes and
    the Making of Inequality." *Socio-Economic Review*, 12.3 (2014):
    573-608.

[^43]: Alan Liu, \"[Drafts for Against the Cultural Singularity (book in
    progress).](http://liu.english.ucsb.edu/drafts-for-against-the-cultural-singularity)\"
    2 May
    2016. [http://liu.english.ucsb.edu/drafts-for-against-the-cultural-singularity](https://liu.english.ucsb.edu/drafts-for-against-the-cultural-singularity).

[^44]: Lauren Klein, "Distant Reading after Moretti," Lauren F. Klein
    \[blog\] (January 2018).

[^45]: Catherine D'Ignazio and Lauren F. Klein, "Feminist data
    visualization," in Workshop on Visualization for the Digital
    Humanities, VIS4DH (Baltimore, IEEE, 2016).

[^46]: All relevant data and code is available at the *Cultural
    Analytics* dataverse repository at
    <https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataverse.xhtml?alias=culturalanalytics>.

[^47]: D'Ignazio and Klein, "Feminist data visualization."
