---
author: Andrea Zeffiro
date: '05.17.19'
shortauthor: Andrea Zeffiro
shorttitle: Towards A Queer Futurity of Data
title: Towards A Queer Futurity of Data
---

::: {.entry .print-only}
::: {#post-2399 .post-2399 .post .type-post .status-publish .format-standard .has-post-thumbnail .hentry .category-articles}
###### *Peer-Reviewed By: Tanya Clement and Amelia Acker*

###### *Clusters: [Data](http://culturalanalytics.org/2018/01/data/)*

###### *Article DOI: [10.22148/16.038](http://doi.org/10.22148/16.038)*

###### *PDF DOI:* [*10.31235/osf.io/3kfs5*](https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/3kfs5)

###### *Journal ISSN: 2371-4549*

###### *Cite: Andrea Zeffiro, "Towards A Queer Futurity of Data," Journal of Cultural Analytics. May 17, 2019. PDF DOI:*[*10.31235/osf.io/3kfs5﻿*](https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/3kfs5)

 

Future Visions {#mce_4 style="text-align:center"}
--------------

On February 17th, 2017, Mark Zuckerberg published a 5,800-word Facebook
post rescripting the company's Corporate Social Responsibility strategy
and defining its future directions.[^1] The manifesto, as some
commentators referred to it, declared Facebook's future vision for
"developing the social infrastructure for community" and emphasized the
company's focus on fostering a global community that is supportive,
safe, informed, civically-engaged, and inclusive.[^2] "To our
community," the post begins, "On our journey to connect the world, we
often discuss products we're building and updates on our business. Today
I want to focus on the most important question of all: are we building
the world we all want?"[^3] Zuckerberg goes on to propose how Facebook
can shape an equitable future, explaining how, "In times like these, the
most important thing we at Facebook can do is develop the social
infrastructure to give people the power to build a global community that
works for all of us."[^4] This is a radically optimistic and persuasive
agenda, and if one were to focus solely on the efforts of community
building, then one might not be compelled to consider how, in fact,
Facebook will achieve its future vision. Omitted from this sanguine
future narrative is any mention whatsoever of data as its key asset. The
basic work Facebook does is to collect data and to hold on to it for a
long time, if not forever.[^5] Thus, the future conjured for us by
Facebook necessitates the production of data by its participants, though
not once is data referenced.

My contribution to this special issue of *Cultural Analytics* hinges on
but digresses from a reflection on Zuckerberg's manifesto, and I focus
instead on that which is invoked through its conspicuous absence: data.
It has been nearly a year since Cambridge Analytica dominated news
reports and collective fascination, and we now know more, though still
not enough, as to how Facebook traffics consumer data. In this
enlightened climate is knowledge truly power? Though we know more, our
capacity to talk back to an entity like Facebook is limited. Short of
any alternatives, some of us will choose to continue to use the platform
because it is where we organize collectively and maintain ties to social
groups. Others may heed to the disclosures and tighten controls over how
data is shared within, across, and outside of the platform. And others
yet will pull the proverbial plug and shutter their accounts. Indeed,
these are choices one can make in response to Facebook's dubious data
practices, but none enter into dialogue with the monolithic entity
specifically, or data cultures more generally. What other options do we
have to talk back?

The aim of this commentary is to move beyond critique and put forth an
alternate framework to think about data cultures. Thus, this work
invites a return to theory,[^6] and not as a means to render 'big data'
intelligible, but rather to draw out its limits, inadequacies, and
dissonances, and to encourage new ways of thinking about the future of
and with data. What follows charts the contours of 'reproductive data
futurism' as a conceptual framework that seeks to reframe our thinking
about data in the present in order to imagine solutions to political,
social and economic problems that are otherwise framed as problems data
can fix.

 

**Data as Culture as Regime of Truth** {#data-as-culture-as-regime-of-truth style="text-align:center"}
--------------------------------------

'Big data' is a floating signifier. It is referenced in relation to our
interactions and habits online, our media use and preferences, and it is
named as an agent in politics, business, education, healthcare, and
social services, to name but a few more prominent areas of application.
Big data, then, is at once everywhere and nowhere; it is everything and
nothing. It is precisely its elusiveness, which prevents us from knowing
it, and in turn, sustains its authority. Working through the evasiveness
of the term, I frame big data co-productively as a technical assemblage,
and an ideological apparatus. Data emerge from a nexus of computational
tools, techniques and protocols, and infrastructures and institutions.
Data are shaped by what Alexander Galloway (2004) describes as the
'protocological condition'.[^7] "The founding principle of the Net is
control, not freedom", writes Galloway. "Control has existed from the
beginning."[^8] For scholars like Galloway and Wendy Chun,[^9] the
internet is far from a 'free for all' and came into existence and
continues to exist as a controlled network through which protocols, as
standards, govern how technological developments are agreed to, adopted,
implemented, and ultimately put into practice[^10] and normalizes
specific behaviours, attitudes, and values that uphold and reinforce a
big data paradigm. The technical assemblage and ideological apparatus
create new conditions of seeing. Orit Halpern[^11] refers to these
assumptions about the value of data as effectuating 'communicative
objectivity', which are new forms of observation and rationality through
which we are trained and train ourselves to observe and analyze the
world.

The forms of observation and rationality and the techniques and
procedures that are valorized for creating new conditions of seeing are
indicative of what Foucault referred to as a 'regime of truth.'[^12]
"Truth", according to Foucault, "is to be understood as a system of
ordered procedures for the production, regulation, distribution,
circulation and operation of statements."[^13] It "is linked in a
circular relation with systems of power which produce and sustain it,
and to effects of power which produce and sustain it, and to effects of
power which it induces and which extend it."[^14] The regime of truth
legitimized by 'big data' is linked in a circular relation to
'dataism'.[^15] As an ideology governing a new scientific paradigm,
dataism bolsters big data to the production of truth rooted in a belief
in the objective quantification of the tracking of all kinds of personal
data from social media, internet platforms, and other communication
technologies, as well as a trust in the institutional entities that
collect, interpret, share and monetize data.[^16] Ten years ago, *Wired*
editor Chris Anderson postulated how in the 'Petabyte Age', a new era
marked by the influx of huge amounts of data and the statistical tools
to process and analyze this data, correlation supplants causation and
scientific inquiry is able to advance without the hampering of
consistent models or integrated theories.[^17] "Who knows why people do
what they do?" asks Anderson. "The point is they do it, and we can track
and measure it with unprecedented fidelity. With enough data, the
numbers speak for themselves."[^18] Indeed, Anderson's thesis is
provocative by intent, written at the forefront of the mainstreaming of
the term, 'big data', and yet, it persists as a master narrative that
reinforces a prevailing data paradigm. A belief and trust in big data as
the 'holy grail of behavioural knowledge' or as neutral 'imprints or
symptoms of people's actual behaviours or moods'[^19] validates it as a
conduit towards an objective and accurate view of reality.

 

**Reproductive Data Futurism** {#reproductive-data-futurism style="text-align:center"}
------------------------------

The desire to harness and wield big data is not merely an effort to
comprehend the contemporary present. Predictive analytics, for instance,
employ techniques and tools from data mining, modelling, statistics,
machine learning and artificial intelligence to analyze current data and
make predictions about the future. We are led to believe and trust that
more data collected now will enable us to calibrate a clearer image of
the future. 'The future' evoked here is a linearity or temporality that
protracts the present (the here and the now) into the future (the there
and the later). Thus, the future, in this sense, merely reproduces what
already exists and persists. Building on the work of Lee Edelman,[^20] I
propose 'reproductive data futurism' as a framework for understanding
how projections about the future are intertwined with data in the
present.

In *No Future: Queer Theory and the Death Drive*, Lee Edelman repudiates
futurity and contemporary politics, arguing how both are fettered to a
heteronormative logic of 'reproductive futurism', which for Edelman,
entails surrendering the present for a future embedded in "the logic of
a narrative wherein history unfolds as the future envisioned for a Child
who must never grow up."[^21] The figure of the child, as Edelman
describes, "has come to embody for us the telos of the social order and
come to be seen as the one for whom that order is held in perpetual
trust."[^22] The future is therefore defined by a present
heteronormative social order that must be protected and safeguarded
because it is the space the child will inhabit in order to uphold the
reproductive logic of the present. For Edelman, reproductive futurism is
a logic that underpins all aspects of society and is especially
ingrained in and reproduced by contemporary politics.

Expanding on and departing from Edelman's polemic, the future in
reproductive data futurism is outlined by a technosocial order that must
be preserved and defended because it is the space in which data will be
anchored to reaffirm the logic of the present. Data, much like the
figure of the child evoked by Edelman, is a political trope through
which we are coerced into the promise that more data collected now will
lead to a better and brighter future. For Zuckerberg, for instance, this
includes the capacity to "prevent harm" by building "social
infrastructure to help our community identify problems before they
happen," which demands "building artificial intelligence to understand
more quickly and accurately what is happening across our
community."[^23] Yet such a vision of the future is what Claire Birchall
describes as 'structurally speculative'. "The uses to which collected
data will be put and the meanings it will be given are dependent on
future algorithms and political concerns."[^24] The examples that follow
uphold reproductive data futurism in their promises of a better future.
Better than what? In these future visions, technology relieves
contemporary discords with a more desirable though still uncertain
version of the present. Data is the precondition to fulfilling this
future, and yet these examples carefully unfasten it from their
narratives.

 

**Data Futures** {#data-futures style="text-align:center"}
----------------

In December 2016 when Microsoft acquired LinkedIn for 26 billion
dollars, company President and Chief Legal Officer Brad Smith nestled
the deal between the Brexit vote and the American Presidential Election.
In a blog post aptly titled, "Microsoft-LinkedIn deal cleared by
regulators, opening new doors for people around the world", Smith wrote
how,

> On both sides of the Atlantic, it has become increasingly apparent
> that many people feel left out and unable to participate in the
> economic growth and opportunities created by the rising digital
> economy...While technology tools are not a panacea for current
> economic challenges, we believe they can make an important
> contribution...Our ambition is to do our part to create more
> opportunity for people who haven't shared in recent economic
> growth.[^25]

Smith asks us to submit to the acquisition as an altruistic aspiration
by Microsoft to create opportunities for individuals snubbed by the
digital economy. Nowhere in Smith's post does he mention data from
LinkedIn's 433 million members. In turn, we are more able to disregard
the troves of highly personalized data now acquired by Microsoft and
embrace the structurally speculative endeavour of enabling those
disenfranchised to find their way into the digital economy with the help
of Microsoft's steering of LinkedIn.

In the same way that Microsoft plans to use "better data and analytical
capabilities to pursue economic development strategies to help connect
people with new opportunities",[^26] Sidewalk Labs, an urban
technologies company that is part of Google's parent company Alphabet,
plans to build what it describes as "the world's first neighborhood
built from the internet up". When the company announced its plans for a
new 'smart city' on 800 acres of federally owned waterfront east of
downtown Toronto, Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau assured
Canadians of how as a "world leader in urban innovation, Sidewalk Labs
will create a testbed for new technologies... that will help us build
smarter, greener, more inclusive cities which we hope to see scaled
across Toronto's eastern waterfront and, eventually, in other parts of
Canada and across the world."[^27] Quayside, as the project is called,
will be equipped with sensors and cameras tracking everyone who lives,
works or passes through the area. The trade-off of continuous data
tracking and surveillance, as we are reassured, is that the data
gathered will be used to 'instruct' the smart city to be responsive to
its residents and environment. Nevertheless, in the smart city of the
future, we find ourselves snagged within what Rob Kitchin has identified
as a 'data paradox'. Data systems implemented to make societies more
secure, safe, competitive, productive, efficient, transparent and
accountable, necessarily do so through processes that in effect monitor,
survey, discipline, repress, persuade, coerce and exploit
individuals.[^28]

In the examples above, reproductive data futurism is codified in part
through an expectant present wherein history can be straightened out by
even more data. If we invest in Microsoft's or Sidewalk Labs'
reproductive data futurism, for instance, in regard to data acquisition
and predictive analytics that tout to make society more equitable, then
we willingly submit to their deliberately obtuse data practices. And if
we are able to convince ourselves that the future these entities suggest
we want is indeed the future we so desire, then we are more able to push
aside any concerns we may have by virtue of our investment in
reproductive data futurism.

Despite promises by Microsoft and Alphabet to produce a more desirable
social order, their visions of the future, however progressive, are an
endless reproduction of the same. Edelman describes politics in similar
terms. \"For politics, however radical the means by which specific
constituencies attempt to produce a more desirable social order,
remains, at its core, conservative insofar as it works to *affirm* a
structure, to *authenticate* a social order, which it then intends to
transmit to the future in the form of its inner Child.\"[^29] Similarly,
as I argue below, Facebook affirms and authenticates what André Brock
has identified as the 'social structure' of the Western Internet, which
privileges and normalizes White, masculine, bourgeois, heterosexual and
Christian culture.[^30]

At face value, Zuckerberg's manifesto rescripts the company's Corporate
Social Responsibility strategy in light of the company's confrontation
with waves of criticism and complaints for its role in supporting the
proliferation of 'fake news', a mishandling of 'Trending' topics, and
its complicity in perpetuating information-filter bubbles. We catch a
glimpse of a vulnerable Zuckerberg, who admits how, "the complexity of
the issues" of the last year have "been painful for me because I often
agree with those criticizing us that we're making mistakes."[^31]
Lamenting further, Zuckerberg describes how Facebook is "a work in
progress" and how the company is "dedicated to learning and
improving."[^32] If one were to concentrate on the conscience-stricken
discourse and the laundry list of ways in which Facebook will foster a
future through "a global infrastructure that works for everyone", then
one can easily calibrate reception of the text to its apologetic
undertones. Indeed, Zuckerberg's manifesto is first and foremost a
public relations manoeuvre aimed at steadying what had been a tumultuous
period for the company. However, embedded within the post's opaque
transparency is Facebook's corporate agenda, which unwittingly leaks to
us its colonial plan. Most tellingly, it does so, as Tamara Shepherd
writes, "by positioning itself as an actor with a 'worldwide vantage
point,' conflating its US-based culturally imperialistic perspective
('Sitting here in California') with a global 'us'."[^33] And it does so
too by upholding what already exists, that is, the Internet.
Zuckerberg's post outlines a crucial rhetorical shift in the platform's
branding. Facebook is uncoupled from 'social network', the term it
became synonymous with, and in its vacancy, we encounter 'social
infrastructure'. The rhetorical shift from network to infrastructure
aligns neatly with Facebook's long-term goal. Facebook is no longer
invested in operating as a network, rather it wants to be *the* network;
it wants to be the internet.

 

**Data Pasts** {#data-pasts style="text-align:center"}
--------------

Prior to the publication of 'Building Global Community', Facebook's
colonizing efforts were evident in Internet.org (rebranded as Free
Basics in 2015), the company's philanthropic project to bring affordable
mobile internet to developing regions. In August 2013, Zuckerberg shared
a 10-page white paper on Facebook titled "Is Connectivity A Human
Right". "For almost ten years," it begins, "Facebook has been on a
mission to make the world more open and connected."[^34] Zuckerberg
outlines how universal basic internet service is a human right and how
Facebook can facilitate global connectivity. "\[M\]any people who have
never experienced the internet" do not understand particulars about it,
such as "what a data plan is or why they'd want one."[^35] And yet,
"most people have heard of services like Facebook and messaging and they
want access to them. If we can provide people access to these services,
then they'll discover other content they want and begin to use and
understand the broader internet."[^36] However, Internet.org is not 'the
broader internet'. Rather, it is akin to a walled garden that allows
'free' access only to a Facebook-sanctioned set of services. Perhaps
this is why Facebook went to such great lengths to frame the project as
a humanitarian effort. As *Wired*'s Jessi Hempel recently explained,
Internet.org was presented as a socially concerned effort in every
respect. "Its name ended in 'dot-org,' appropriating the suffix
nonprofits use to signal their do-gooder status on the web. Zuckerberg
wrote that he wasn't expecting Facebook to earn a profit from
'serv\[ing\] the next few billion people,' suggesting he was motivated
by a moral imperative, not a financial one."[^37]

Both the 2017 manifesto and 2013 white paper echo the rhetoric of the
early internet, when 'visionaries' sought to secure the public's belief
and trust in it with evidence of a better future. One of the most
enduring myths of the history of internet is that Al Gore created it.
The origins of the tall tale are in a March 9, 1999 interview on CNN's
"Late Edition". The program's host, Wolf Blitzer, asked the sitting Vice
President what distinguished him from his challenger for the Democratic
presidential nomination, Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey. Gore's
response, in part, reflected on his role in promoting and fostering the
economic and legislative development of the internet. As Gore explained:

> During my service in the United States Congress, I took the initiative
> in creating the Internet. I took the initiative in moving forward a
> whole range of initiatives that have proven to be important to our
> country's economic growth and environmental protection, improvements
> in our educational system.[^38]

Gore's articulation of the stabilizing effects of technology intimates a
future wherein social, political and economic problems are problems that
can be alleviated by technology. Similarly, the Facebook of the future,
as Zuckerberg promised in 2017, will be "for keeping us safe, for
informing us, for civic engagement, and for inclusion of all."[^39]

Perhaps one of the enduring myths to protract from contemporary digital
culture is one in which Facebook, and Zuckerberg by proxy, democratize
the internet. We are in the folds of such a narrative. For instance,
during Facebook's Q1 2018 earnings call, Zuckerberg reported on how "our
Internet.org efforts have helped almost 100 million people get access to
the internet who may not have had it otherwise."[^40] History unfolds as
the future prescribed by and contained within the social infrastructure.
Each and every individual 'helped' into Facebook's ecosystem becomes a
compulsory data producer. In Althusserian terms,[^41] individuals are
interpellated into an arrangement that is sustained by an asymmetrical
relationship between those who collect, mine, store and analyze data,
and those whom data collection targets. In this equation, the 'social
engineers' define the problems and put forth solutions to the
'engineered'.[^42]

 

**Compulsory Data Production** {#compulsory-data-production style="text-align:center"}
------------------------------

A reliable mode of indenturing individuals into compulsory data
production is to anchor specific data practices to formative social
experiences. In June 2018, Facebook introduced Messenger Kids - a
version of its text and video messaging app for children under the age
of 13 - to the Canadian market. The app was pitched as a tool for
parents to allow their children to communicate with family and close
friends in an environment touted as more secure and controlled than
other messaging apps. For instance, Messenger Kids is full of 'parental
controls'; kids must get an adult's authorization via the adult's own
Facebook account to sign up and add each new contact, it contains no ads
or in-app purchases, and it does not require a child to use their real
name.[^43] The aim to train kids to use lighter versions of social media
platforms is an opportunity for them to acquire digital literacies, and
there is obvious merit to such a project. Nevertheless, Messenger Kids
is somewhat superfluous given how kids already communicate with close
friends and family by other digital means, such as texting.

Perhaps we might also understand Facebook's app as a means of
conditioning kids into data subjects. In this example, a child's early
encounter with a social media platform is marked by interactions with
individuals they are close to. These encounters instill a level of
intimacy and familiarity in kids, but also in the adults they connect
with. First and foremost, an adult's account is required to serve as an
intermediary between a child and the app, and the adult is bound
perfunctorily to Facebook. Beyond that, a child's enthusiasm to connect
via the app may incentivize an adult to (re)engage with the social media
platform and use it actively in order to communicate with and possibly
monitor a child's use. In this regard, the indenture of the child to
Facebook is also a reach towards the social control of adults. Indeed,
the messenger *are* kids.

Reproductive data futurism is at play here in the way the figure of the
child is fixed as a prop to secure the reproduction of a particular
technosocial order underpinned by compulsory data production. By this I
mean there is a natural inclination assumed by big tech that we all want
to be a part of the social infrastructure. When Zuckerberg asks at the
outset of his text, "are we building the world we all want?" he is not
so much as asking us what world we want, but rather proposing one to us.
This is a future vision accented by what some might identify as the
pillars of an ideal social order: supportive, safe, informed,
civically-engaged, and inclusive.

The tethering of childhood socialization to a social media platform
reinforces a communicative objectivity about the value of big tech in
helping shape the social practices of children. According to this logic,
a child's social life is more secure and controllable - even justifying
the need for 'parental control' - through an app like Messenger Kids.
And yet, this hopeful prototype of the future replicates the 'coercive
universalization' Edelman identifies with the image of the Child. That
is, it "serves to regulate political discourse - to prescribe what will
count as political discourse - by compelling such discourse to accede in
advance to the reality of a collective future whose figurative status we
are never permitted to acknowledge or address."[^44] The desire to be a
part of the social infrastructure is manufactured by anchoring
compulsory data practices to the child; the literal embodiment of the
future.

Some of us may rebuff an app like Messenger Kids as redundant to
existing modes of communication or simply as unnecessary for kids,
however, when other forms of data servitude are legitimized and
normalized by disciplinary institutions, like schools, it is difficult
to envision different organizing principles for communal relations to
exist outside of compulsory data production. In numerous school
districts in Canada and the United States, for example, Google's G Suite
for Education is mandated as a teaching and learning platform. G Suite
incorporates Google Classroom with other apps and services like Google
Drive, Forms, Calendar, Search, Docs, Sheets, Slides and Gmail, and it
boasts one online setting in which instructors can post resources and
evaluation methods, communicate with students, track their progress, and
share information with parents/guardians. By all measures, it is
seamless and easy to use. In 2017, G Suite for Education counted more
than 70 million users worldwide.[^45] Google's privacy policy for their
education products stipulates that the company does not collect student
data for advertising purposes or sell it to third parties, and the apps
are also ad-free. But Google nevertheless collects data on
students.[^46] The policy allows for the collection of information
including location and GPS data, mobile network, and phone number.

The structurally speculative nature of student data is concerning
because we simply do not know its life span or the ways in which it
could be exploited by future algorithms and political agendas. But also,
when G Suite is adopted there are few, if any, alternatives offered to
students, which means they are compelled into data production. Thus, of
particular concern is how instituting a corporate platform that
collects, stores, and possibly shares student data with other partners,
induces regulated effects of dataism.

An educational platform like G Suite conditions students, and in many
instances the adults who care for them, into ways of being/becoming in
the world that are engendered, in part, through compulsory data
production. It becomes easier to justify the tracking of student data
because of an engrained belief and trust in educational institutions.
And if we are able to accept a corporate platform as indispensable to
education, then we may be less inclined to think our way out of or
outside of compulsory forms of data servitude in other domains as well.

 

**Data Impasse** {#data-impasse style="text-align:center"}
----------------

Facebook, and indeed so many other corporate entities that collect and
broker our data, manufacture for us scenes of fantasy of 'the good
life'[^47] made more possible with big data. In his "Building Global
Community" statement, Mark Zuckerberg's rhetoric frames Facebook as the
conduit to the objects of our desire. In the scenes of the future, we
are told how data will bring happiness with close-knit communities, a
safer society, economic fairness. And we need these engineered scenes of
the future because, according to Zuckerberg, the problem we face is a
"lack of a sense of hope for the future."  He articulates this crisis in
his manifesto, explaining how,

> Since the 1970s, membership in some local groups has declined by as
> much as one-quarter, cutting across all segments of the population.
> The decline raises deeper questions alongside surveys showing large
> percentages of our population lack a sense of hope for the future...
> As one pastor told me: 'People feel unsettled. A lot of what was
> settling in the past doesn't exist anymore.'[^48]

In this example, Zuckerberg plants the roots to our collective
hopelessness in the historical present, as the scene that has severed
some kind of ordinary life that was supposed to continue and to which
people felt optimistic and settled.[^49] And because we cannot go back,
and we are acutely aware of this limitation and hindrance to what was,
we occasionally invest in "a cluster of promises we want someone or
something to make to us and make possible for us."[^50] We see this
pervasive cultural fantasy carried beyond reproductive data futurism, in
those politicized utterances about making \<something\> great again.
Zuckerberg asks us to believe that at some point in the future, Facebook
will steer us back to where we were before, but also, somewhere better.

At play is what Lauren Berlant calls 'cruel optimism', "the condition of
maintaining an attachment to a significantly problematic object."[^51]
Data, as the object of cruel optimism, is the thing to which we pass our
fantasy of sovereignty for safe-keeping.[^52] For Berlant, "optimistic
relation\[s\] are not inherently cruel" but rather, "\[t\]hey become
cruel only when the object that draws your attachment actively impedes
the aim that brought you to it initially."[^53] We may recognize
something like Messenger Kids as a means through which we can forge new
kinds of social interactions with kids, and we may identify our
enthusiasm for a project like Quayside as tied to our support for
sustainable cities. Our optimism toward these things, however, may not
always feel optimistic.[^54] Any doubts we may have about the good-life
fantasies these data-driven objects promise, such as questioning whether
the future we are told we want is indeed the future we desire, registers
an instability in our investment to these things. And yet, because our
optimism for these objects is so intimately tied to what we "look
forward to being in the world,"[^55] we preserve our "attachment to
compromised conditions of possibility."[^56] For Berlant, this 'arc and
rhythm' is a way to preserve optimism for irreparable objects. "The
compulsion to repeat a toxic optimism" explains Berlant, "can suture
someone or a world to a cramped and unimaginative space of committed
replication, just in case it will be different."[^57] Similarly,
reproductive data futurism persists in the way we (un)willingly consent
to a future that necessitates the production of data in the present, but
that remains perpetually out of reach. And because this future can never
be fully realized, we reach towards it repeatedly, expecting that this
time things will change in the right way.[^58]

In the nearly two years since Zuckerberg released "Building Global
Community", a lot has changed for Facebook and for its members. The
company has weathered a series of crises, including foreign interference
in elections, the Cambridge Analytica scandal, Zuckerberg's testimony
before the U.S. Congress and European Parliament, the company's
admittance to playing a role in ethnic cleansing in Myanmar, and the
hiring of a PR firm to discredit critics. To put it bluntly, Facebook
has failed miserably at building community. In fact, our desire for what
data-driven platforms promise to be and the various ways they pledge to
improve our lives are obstacles to our flourishing.[^59] Maybe
Zuckerberg is correct in his assessment about our "lack of a sense of
hope for the future." It just so happens Facebook is the object to which
we direct our waning optimism. And yet, even with this awareness and
with the fraying of the good-life fantasies, many of us maintain an
attachment to it. It renders us impassive. This is precisely a relation
of cruel optimism,[^60] but it is also reproductive data futurism at
work.

Reproductive data futurism, much like cruel optimism, is a force that
compels us to walk back from moments of unsettling revelations and from
the brink of coming to terms with the reality that these data-driven
entities are first and foremost revenue generating corporations. And
yet, we depend on the discomfort at the realization that our optimistic
attachments are flawed, for instance, in order to decipher a company's
benevolent rhetoric as a smokescreen for its egregious and disorganized
data practices. These instances of rupture, though short-lived, open a
space for reflection, induce a creeping sense of incompleteness, and
surface fleeting impulses of refusal that clarify the impotence in our
hope. In this respect, we may temporarily betray the mandate of
reproductive data futurism, which is rooted in "the hope of forging some
more perfect social order" through data, and if we "refuse the
insistence of hope itself as affirmation", we might find pockets of
resistance in hope's dissolution.[^61]

This space of fracture I describe is akin to what Berlant defines as
'the impasse',

> "a stretch of time in which one moves around with a sense that the
> world is at once intensely present and enigmatic, such that the
> activity of living demands both a wandering absorptive awareness and a
> hypervigilance that collects material that might help to clarify
> things."[^62]

The impasse is a 'transitional moment', in which we realize that
existing 'genres' can no longer make sense of the present. Berlant's
conceptualization of the term helps us to rethink our impassivity in a
conventional sense. We have not become insensible or immune to 'big
data', nor have we lost our way. In fact, we are acutely aware of the
ways in which data driven computational tools and techniques have shaped
our lives. In turn, our impassivity is a "style of composure"[^63] that
guides us through the impasse - that 'transitional moment' of adjustment
to the loss of the good-life fantasies.[^64] The impasse signals our
capacity to conceive of alternative genres for navigating future data
narratives in the present. In this sense, it is a space of contained
action through which we might unlock different ways in which the
interruption of norms of the reproduction of dataism can be adapted to,
felt out and lived,[^65] and usher us towards a queer futurity of data.

 

**Queer Futurity** {#queer-futurity style="text-align:center"}
------------------

The title of my piece "Towards a Queer Futurity of Data" alludes to a
gesture or movement forward. First and foremost it describes the
ideation presented in the text, which moves *towards* a reading of data
cultures through the lens of reproductive data futurism. The text
presents the kernels to an evolving framework that seeks to expand our
perception of data cultures with particular attention to the limitations
and deficiencies of contemporary data paradigms.

At the centre of this 'working through' and 'working towards' is a queer
politic that begins with a rejection of 'straight time', what José
Estebon Muñoz describes as "an autonaturalizing temporality" in which
"the only futurity promised is that of reproductive majoritarian
heterosexuality."[^66] A hetero-normative logic inscribes contemporary
data cultures. Indeed, it is a logic that pervades society including the
technosocial. The desire to colonize global populations through data
services by equating access to an enclosed technical platform as a
fundamental human right is indicative of this logic. Subjugation might
be packaged as a mobile internet service in the global south, a social
networking site geared towards professionalization, or an educational
platform that boasts a suite of tools customizable to learning needs.
These examples indenture individuals into compulsory data production in
the hope of realizing a future version of the contemporary present.

When reproductive data futurism entraps us in a heteronormative logic,
we are less able to think through its recursiveness and reproductive
power. For instance, when the figure of the child bears the burden of
substantiating data as a political trope, we become invested in dataism
because it is also an investment in the future child. Thus, we see here
the reproduction of the heteronormative fantasy itself - the perpetual
promise of the good life fastened not only to the child but also to 'the
family' as an extension of an ideal social order it reinforces. The
'normative' in this respect, provides an 'aspirational anchor'[^67] for
those of us whose senses of security and stability are dwindling. Thus,
if constituting a new politics of truth demands a fundamental change to
our "political, economic, institutional regime of the production of
truth" then we need radical models to wrangle ourselves from a future
manufactured by "the fraying 'good life' narratives we hold onto." [^68]
In this respect, we are better served to receive Zuckerbeg's question -
"are we building the world we all want?"[^69] - not simply as a
rhetorical strategy on Facebook's part, but as a genuine inquiry into
the state of our attachments. Who is building this world? And for whom?
We are encumbered with the task of rescripting engineered fantasies of
the future with a figuration that allows people to think beyond
reproductive data futurism.

Finally, the title of the piece signals also an expansion or movement
outward. What I have sketched here is a partial framework for
reproductive data futurism. In other words, it is incomplete. Edelman's
project is an obvious and crucial starting point, yet it is limited by
its intransitive insistence that the "future stops here."[^70] "We do
not intend a new politics, a better society, a brighter tomorrow" writes
Edelman, "since all these fantasies reproduce the past, through
displacement, in the form of future."[^71] I agree with Edelman's
appraisal of how future fantasies merely reproduce the past in a future
tense, but I think it is necessary to envision and experiment, by
beginning to see, the alternate data futures that already exist or are
currently under construction, rather than foreclose the possibility of
any future. In turn, I propose we lean *towards* theories of queer
futurity[^72] to undermine data paradigms so that we can begin to see
the multiplicity of nonormative logics and organizations of data that
constitute, supplement, and abridge reproductive data futurism. If we
can better understand the deficiencies and biases of data paradigms in
the present, then we might begin to imagine possible futures and seek
out strategies to support these future visions.

![](88x31.png "https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by/4.0/88x31.png")

Unless otherwise specified, all work in this journal is licensed under
a [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
:::
:::

[^1]: Mark Zuckerberg, \"[Building Global
    Community](https://www.facebook.com/notes/mark-zuckerberg/building-global-community/10154544292806634),\"
    Facebook, February 16, 2017, accessed November 03, 2018.

[^2]: Zuckerberg, "Building Global Community."

[^3]: Zuckerberg, "Building Global Community."

[^4]: Zuckerberg, "Building Global Community."

[^5]: Brian X. Chen, \"[I Downloaded the Information That Facebook Has
    on Me.
    Yikes](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/11/technology/personaltech/i-downloaded-the-information-that-facebook-has-on-me-yikes.html).\"
    The New York Times, April 11, 2018, accessed November 03, 2018,
    Keith Collins and Larry Buchanan, \"[How Facebook Lets Brands and
    Politicians Target
    You](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2018/04/11/technology/facebook-sells-ads-life-details.html%EF%BB%BF),\"
    The New York Times, April 11, 2018, accessed November 03, 2018, Nick
    Douglas, \"[Here's All the Data Facebook Can Learn From Your
    Selfies](http://%20https://lifehacker.com/heres-all-the-data-facebook-can-learn-from-your-selfies-1825148033),\"
    Lifehacker, April 10, 2018, accessed November 03, 2018. Sheera
    Frenkel, Matthew Rosenberg, and Nicholas Confessore, \"[Facebook
    Data Collected by Quiz App Included Private
    Messages,](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/10/technology/facebook-cambridge-analytica-private-messages.html?action=click&contentCollection=Personal%20Tech&module=RelatedCoverage%C2%AEion=Marginalia&pgtype=article)\"
    The New York Times, April 10, 2018, accessed November 03, 2018, Alex
    Hern, \"[Facebook Admits Tracking Users and Non-users
    Off-site](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/apr/17/facebook-admits-tracking-users-and-non-users-off-site%EF%BB%BF),\"
    The Guardian, April 17, 2018, accessed November 03, 2018, Madison
    Malone Kircher, \"[Ever Record a Video on Facebook? Facebook Still
    Has
    It](https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2018/03/facebook-secretly-saved-videos-users-deleted.html%EF%BB%BF),\"
    New York Magazine, March 28, 2018, accessed November 03, 2018, John
    Naughton, \"[Data-hungry Facebook Seeks Younger
    Recruits](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/dec/10/data-hungry-facebook-seeks-younger-recruits-messenger-kids%EF%BB%BF),\"
    The Guardian, December 10, 2017, accessed November 03, 2018, Kurt
    Wagner, \"[This Is How Facebook Collects Data on You Even If You
    Don't Have an
    Account](https://www.recode.net/2018/4/20/17254312/facebook-shadow-profiles-data-collection-non-users-mark-zuckerberg),\"
    Recode, April 20, 2018, accessed November 03, 2018, Chris Walters,
    \"[Facebook's New Terms Of Service: 'We Can Do Anything We Want With
    Your Content.
    Forever'](https://consumerist.com/2009/02/15/facebooks-new-terms-of-service-we-can-do-anything-we-want-with-your-content-forever),\"
    Consumerist, February 16, 2009, accessed November 03, 2018.

[^6]: For instance, see: Chris Anderson, \"[The End of Theory: The Data
    Deluge Makes the Scientific Method
    Obsolete](https://www.wired.com/2008/06/pb-theory/),\" *Wired*,
    January 26, 2008, accessed November 03, 2018.

[^7]: Alexander R. Galloway, *Protocol: How Control Exists after
    Decentralization* (Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2006).

[^8]: Galloway, *Protocol*, 142.

[^9]: Wendy Hui Kyong Chun, *Control and Freedom: Power and Paranoia in
    the Age of Fiber Optics* (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2006).

[^10]: Chun, *Control and Freedom*, 7.

[^11]: Orit Halpern, *Beautiful Data: A History of Vision and Reason
    since 1945* (Durham: Duke University Press, 2015).

[^12]: Michel Foucault, *Power/knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other
    Writings 1972-1977* (New York: Pantheon, 1980).

[^13]: Foucault, *Power/knowledge*, 133.

[^14]: Foucault, *Power/knowledge,* 133.

[^15]: Jose van Dijck, "Datafication, Dataism and Dataveillance: Big
    Data between Scientific Paradigm and Ideology," *Surveillance &
    Society* 12, no. 2 (2014): 197-208, doi:10.24908/ss.v12i2.4776.

[^16]: van Dijck, "Datafication, Dataism and Dataveillance: Big Data
    between Scientific Paradigm and Ideology," 198.

[^17]: Chris Anderson, \"[The End of Theory: The Data Deluge Makes the
    Scientific Method
    Obsolete](https://www.wired.com/2008/06/pb-theory/),\" Wired,
    January 26, 2008, accessed November 03, 2018.

[^18]: Anderson, "The End of Theory", 2008.

[^19]: van Dijck, "Datafication, Dataism and Dataveillance: Big Data
    between Scientific Paradigm and Ideology," 199.

[^20]: Lee Edelman, *No Future: Queer Theory and the Death Drive*
    (Durham: Duke University Press, 2007).

[^21]: Edelman, *No Future,* 151.

[^22]: Edelman, *No Future,* 11.

[^23]: Mark Zuckerberg, \"[Building Global
    Community](https://www.facebook.com/notes/mark-zuckerberg/building-global-community/10154544292806634),\"
    Facebook, February 16, 2017, accessed November 03, 2018.

[^24]: Clare Birchall, "Shareveillance: Subjectivity between Open and
    Closed Data," Big Data & Society 3, no. 2 (2016), 6:
    doi:10.1177/2053951716663965.

[^25]: Brad Smith, \"[Microsoft-LinkedIn Deal Cleared by Regulators,
    Opening New Doors for People around the
    World](https://blogs.microsoft.com/blog/2016/12/06/microsoft-linkedin-deal-cleared-regulators-opening-doors-people-around-world/),\"
    The Official Microsoft Blog, December 06, 2016, accessed November
    03, 2018.

[^26]: Smith, "Microsoft-LinkedIn Deal Cleared by Regulators."

[^27]: Trudeau quoted in, Tyler Irving, \"[Google to Build Living
    Laboratory for Urban Innovation in
    Toronto](https://www.utoronto.ca/news/google-build-living-laboratory-urban-innovation-toronto),\"
    University of Toronto News, accessed November 03, 2018.

[^28]: Rob Kitchin, *The Data Revolution: Big Data, Open Data, Data
    Infrastructures & Their Consequences* (Los Angeles: Sage, 2017),
    165.

[^29]: Edelman, *No Future,* 3.

[^30]: André Brock, "Beyond the Pale: The Blackbird Web Browser's
    Critical Reception," *New Media & Society* 13, no. 7 (2011):
    1085-103, doi:10.1177/1461444810397031, 1088.

[^31]: Zuckerberg, \"B[uilding Global
    Community.](https://www.facebook.com/notes/mark-zuckerberg/building-global-community/10154544292806634%EF%BB%BF)\"

[^32]: Zuckerberg, "Building Global Community."

[^33]: Tamara Shepherd, \"[Reading the Zuckerberg
    Manifesto](http://culturedigitally.org/2017/02/reading-the-zuckerberg-manifesto/),\"
    Culture Digitally, February 17, 2017, accessed November 03, 2018.

[^34]: Mark Zuckerberg, \"[Is Connectivity a Human
    Right?](https://scontent-lga3-1.xx.fbcdn.net/v/t39.2365-6/12057105_1001874746531417_622371037_n.pdf?_nc_cat=0&oh=a6aa766e7f02de936d323d7e417c22c4&oe=5B52DE27%EF%BB%BF)\"
    August 20, 2013, accessed November 03, 2018.

[^35]: Zuckerberg, "Is Connectivity a Human Right?", 4.

[^36]: Zuckerberg, "Is Connectivity a Human Right?"

[^37]: Jessi Hempel, \"[What Happened to Facebook's Grand Plan to Wire
    the
    World?](https://www.wired.com/story/what-happened-to-facebooks-grand-plan-to-wire-the-world/)\"
    Wired, May 20, 2018, accessed November 03, 2018.

[^38]: *[Transcript: Vice President Gore on CNN's 'Late
    Edition'](http://www.cnn.com/ALLPOLITICS/stories/1999/03/09/president.2000/transcript.gore/)*,
    CNN, March 9, 1999, accessed November 03, 2018.

[^39]: Zuckerberg, \"[Building Global
    Community](https://www.facebook.com/notes/mark-zuckerberg/building-global-community/10154544292806634%EF%BB%BF).\"

[^40]: Zuckerberg in, Josh Constine, \"[Facebook Beats in Q1 and Boosts
    Daily User Growth to 1.45B amidst
    Backlash](https://techcrunch.com/2018/04/25/facebook-q1-2018-earnings/%EF%BB%BF),\"
    TechCrunch, April 25, 2018, accessed November 03, 2018.

[^41]: Louis Althusser, "Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses,"
    trans. Ben Brewster, in *Lenin and Philosophy and Other Essays*,
    121-76 (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1971).

[^42]: Danah Boyd and Kate Crawford, "Critical Questions For Big
    Data," *Information, Communication & Society* 15, no. 5 (2012):
    662-79, doi:10.1080/1369118x.2012.678878; Anita Gurumurthy and
    Nandini Chami, \"[Data: The New Four-letter Word for
    Feminism](https://www.genderit.org/articles/data-new-four-letter-word-feminism%EF%BB%BF),\"
    GenderIT.org, accessed November 03, 2018.

[^43]: Rachel Metz, \"[Facebook's app for kids should freak parents
    out](https://www.technologyreview.com/s/609723/facebooks-app-for-kids-should-freak-parents-out/).\"
    MIT Technology Review, February 7, 2018, accessed November 3, 2018;
    Dani. Deahl, \"[Facebook's controversial Messenger Kids is rolling
    out to Canada and
    Peru](https://www.theverge.com/2018/6/22/17492800/facebooks-controversial-messenger-kids-canada-peru%EF%BB%BF).\"
    The Verge, June 22, 2018, accessed November 3, 2018; Matthew Braga,
    \"[Facebook brings its messaging app for kids to Canada despite
    experts'
    concerns.](https://www.cbc.ca/news/technology/facebook-messenger-kids-launches-canada-1.4717944)\"
    CBC, June 22, 2018, accessed November 3, 2018.

[^44]: Edelman, *No Future,* 11.

[^45]: Frederic Lardinois, \"[Google says its G Suite for Education now
    has 70M
    users,](https://techcrunch.com/2017/01/24/google-says-its-g-suite-for-education-now-has-70m-users/)\"
    Tech Crunch, January 1 2017, accessed November 3, 2018.

[^46]: Jeremy Gillula and Sophia Cope, \"[Google changes its tune when
    it comes to tracking
    students,](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2016/10/google-changes-its-tune-when-it-comes-tracking-students)\"
    Electronic Frontier Foundation, October 6, 2016, accessed October 6,
    2016.

[^47]: Lauren Berlant, *Cruel Optimism* (Durham: Duke University Press,
    2011), 14.

[^48]: Zuckerberg, \"[Building Global
    Community.](https://www.facebook.com/notes/mark-zuckerberg/building-global-community/10154544292806634%EF%BB%BF)\"

[^49]: Berlant, *Cruel Optimism*, 11.

[^50]: Berlant, *Cruel Optimism*, 23.

[^51]: Berlant, *Cruel Optimism*, 24.

[^52]: Berlant, *Cruel Optimism*, 43.

[^53]: Berlant, *Cruel Optimism*, 1.

[^54]: Berlant, *Cruel Optimism*, 10.

[^55]: Berlant, *Cruel Optimism*, 24.

[^56]: Berlant, *Cruel Optimism*, 24.

[^57]: Berlant, *Cruel Optimism,* 259.

[^58]: Berlant, *Cruel Optimism*, 2.

[^59]: Berlant, *Cruel Optimism*, 1.

[^60]: Berlant, *Cruel Optimism*, 1.

[^61]: Edelman, *No Future*, 4.

[^62]: Berlant, *Cruel Optimism*, 18.

[^63]: Berlant, *Cruel Optimism*, 5.

[^64]: Berlant, *Cruel Optimism*, 11.

[^65]: Berlant, *Cruel Optimism*, 199.

[^66]: José Esteban Muñoz, *Cruising Utopia: The Then and There of Queer
    Futurity* (New York, NY: New York University Press, 2009), 22.

[^67]: Lauren Berlant, \"[Lauren Berlant on her book Cruel
    Optimism,](http://rorotoko.com/interview/20120605_berlant_lauren_on_cruel_optimism/?page=3)\"
    Rorotoko, June 4, 2012, accessed November 3, 2018.

[^68]: José Esteban Muñoz, \"[Living the Wrong Life
    Otherwise](https://socialtextjournal.org/periscope_article/living-the-wrong-life-otherwise/),\"
    Social Text, January 13, 2013, accessed November 3, 2018.

[^69]: Muñoz, "Living the Wrong Life Otherwise."

[^70]: Edelman, *No Future,* 30-31.

[^71]: Edelman, *No Future,* 3.

[^72]: Edelman, *No Future*; Muñoz, "Living the Wrong Life Otherwise";
    Judith Halberstam. *The Queer Art of Failure* (Durham: Duke
    University Press, 2011).
