---
author: Matthew Jockers and Gabi Kirilloff
date: '12.01.16'
shortauthor: Matthew Jockers and Gabi Kirilloff
shorttitle: Understanding Gender and Character Agency in the 19th Century Novel
title: Understanding Gender and Character Agency in the 19th Century Novel
---

###### *Peer-Reviewed By: Anon.*

###### *Clusters: [Genre](http://culturalanalytics.org/2016/05/genre/)*

###### *Journal ISSN: 2371-4549*

###### *Article DOI: [10.22148/16.010](https://doi.org/10.22148/16.010)*

###### *Dataverse DOI: [10.7910/DVN/3UXBOJ](http://dx.doi.org/10.7910/DVN/3UXBOJ)*

 

The relationship between character identity and character action is an
established topic of literary study. In *Morphology of the Folktale,*
Vladimir Propp argues against the separation of "who acts" from "the
question of the actions themselves," instead advocating an approach that
studies characters according to their functions.[^1] Similarly, the
notion of the literary archetype, as influenced by both Joseph Campbell
and Carl Jung, highlights the way in which what characters *do*
influences the way we perceive who characters *are*.[^2] The notion of
literary stereotypes is also tied to this discussion.  As Bamman,
O'Connor, and Smith observe in their study of personas in film,
stereotypical characters are "defined by a fixed set of actions widely
known to be representative of a class."[^3] While actions are only one
part of a complex network of descriptive tools that authors may use to
create characters, [^4] they may offer us a useful insight into the way
that certain behaviors can align with various character identity traits
in literature.  A study of character action may serve as a proxy to not
only demarcate character types, but also to investigate what behaviors,
and *types* of behaviors, were conventionally aligned with different
groups of characters. Bamman, Underwood, and Smith (2014) attempt
something similar in "A Bayesian Mixed Effects Model of Literary
Character."  In that work, the authors focus on modeling specific
character "personas" by studying semantically related words that occur
in proximity to character mentions.  The authors note that "articulating
what a true 'persona' might be for characters is inherently problematic"
and they acknowledge that the "personas learned so far \[by their
model\] do not align neatly with character types known to literary
historians."[^5]  Nevertheless, their study revealed compelling
associations between certain personas and certain genres and, more
importantly for our current research, that certain personas were
"clearly gendered." [^6]  In noting the later, the authors write that
"analysis of latent character types might cast new light on the history
of gender in fiction."[^7]  Our work attempts a more direct and specific
study of character agency in the context of character gender.  To do
this, we explore trends in behavior associated with male and female
characters in 3,329 19^th^ century novels.[^8]

 

### **Historical Background** {#historical-background style="text-align: center;"}

In order to study the depiction of male and female characters, we
focused on character action as a proxy for what we will call "character
agency" or simply "agency."  Though there are several elements that
inform a character's portrayal, including the way they speak (in dialog)
and the author's physical description of the character, examining
character action as expressed through verbs offered a practical window
into the relationships among gender, characterization, and writerly
convention.  Since the texts in our corpus were published between 1800
and 1900, we expected to observe trends that correspond with scholarly
research on 19^th^ century Western gender conventions. For example,
Barbara Welter observes that "submission" was considered a feminine
virtue during the mid 19th century. According to Welter, men \"were
supposed to be religious, although they rarely had time for it, and
supposed to be pure, although it came awfully hard to them, but men were
the movers, the doers, the actors. Women were the *passive*,
*submissive* *responders.*\"[^9]  In *The Crisis of Action in
Nineteenth-century English Literature,* Stefanie Markovits articulates
the way in which these conventions were explicitly tied to action,
referring to the Victorian period as characterized by "women's limited
sphere of action." [^10] To make this claim more explicit, Markovits
cites E. S. Dallas, the *Times* literary critic who in 1866 wrote that
the "first object of the novelist is to get personages in whom we can be
interested; the next is to put them in action. But when women are the
chief characters, how are you to set them in motion? The life of women
cannot well be described as a life of action." [^11]  The existence of
such conventions led us to believe that in most of the 3,329 novels
studied, we would observe male characters behaving differently than
female characters, since Victorian notions of propriety stressed the
docile, passive, and domestic aspects of feminine behavior.

In their influential study of Victorian gender roles, *The Madwoman in
the Attic,* Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar note tendencies similar to
those observed by Welter.  They observe that during the Victorian period
women were categorized as either angels or monsters depending on how
well they adhered to the valorization of passive, domestic female
behavior.[^12] Though focused primarily on prescriptive female gender
roles, these observations point to the fact that ideal male behavior was
also highly standardized.  While men may have been categorized as the
*doers*, this *doing* was also limited to *appropriate* actions;
emotional, domestic, and passive actions would have been considered
feminizing.  Though the 19^th^ century was characterized by literature
that stressed these values, such as etiquette manuals and moralistic
novels, the prevalence of female writers during this period highlights
the way in which gender roles were also changing.  Jane Austen,
Charlotte Brontë, George Elliot, Maria Edgeworth, and Ann Radcliffe are
just a few of the many female authors writing during this period. 
Though it would be incorrect to assume that all female writers were
working against gender stereotypes, the growing predominance of female
authorship, and female readership, points to changing understandings
about gendered behavior.[^13]

To accomplish our study, we needed a way to track both the appearance of
character and the actions associated with characters.  We turned toward
a previous study, conducted by the University of Nebraska Literary Lab
in our efforts to record character action.  This study, conducted by
Baylog (et. al.), in 2014,[^14] examined the connections between gender
and action by extracting gendered pronouns and the verbs following them.
Gendered pronouns, such as "she" and "he," offer a useful and reliable
way of extracting character presence and recording gender.  Extracting
verbs, such as "to faint" and "to command," when they occurred after a
pronoun in a single sentence, provided a straightforward if, at times,
imperfect method for exploring the types of behaviors typically
associated with characters and for subsequently exploring the ways that
19^th^ century gender stereotypes and expectations were portrayed in
literature.  Our current research adopted this approach of utilizing
gendered pronouns and verbs, but we have expanded and improved on the
previous study both by refining the methods for pronoun and verb
extraction and by beginning to address how literary genre complicates
questions surrounding gender and agency. Among other things, our study
explores the extent to which genre may play a role in shaping the sorts
of agency that male and female characters are "allowed" to possess.

 

### **Questions of Genre** {#questions-of-genre style="text-align: center;"}

Though useful to our everyday understanding of literature, "genre" is a
highly contested concept.[^15] While the issues surrounding genre
analysis are complicated, we find that a useful strategy for studying
genre is offered by an approach that understands these categories as
historically and socially constructed.  Such an approach inspires
questions such as, "what types of themes, tropes, plots, and characters
did various authors feel were appropriate (or inappropriate) for the
genres they were engaging with?"  "When and how did authors depart from
genre conventions, or push the boundaries of the genres they were
interacting with?"  In order to compare overall trends in our corpus of
novels with trends in specific genres, we needed a way to determine
which genres to examine, and which novels participated in those genres. 
Initially, we focused on categories, or types of writing, that reflected
19^th^ century, as opposed to contemporary, understandings of genre.  We
wanted to begin our study by focusing on a relatively distinct and
recognizable genre.  We turned our attention to the Gothic because there
was a 19^th^ century conception of the Gothic novel as a type of writing
that was differentiated from the broader and more nebulous categories of
"fiction" and "the novel." This is not to say that the term "Gothic"
itself was consistently used throughout the course of the 19th century
to define this genre. Novels that are now considered to be indicative of
the Gothic genre may at the time have been referred to as Romances or
supernatural fiction. However, the distinct nature of this category as
separate from the nebulous category of fiction at large can be seen in
comments from writers, scholars, and reviewers. For example, in 1800 the
Marquis De Sades remarks of the Gothic that "this genre was the
inevitable product of the revolutionary shock with which the whole of
Europe resounded... ." [^16] Similarly, in *Northanger Abbey*, a novel
that critics have identified as exploring and parodying Gothic
conventions, Jane Austen groups seven "horrid books," each of which
belongs to the Gothic genre. [^17] In addition, the fact that the Gothic
genre has been the subject of feminist criticism and debates about
gender roles made it especially applicable to our research.[^18] In
order to determine which books in our corpus are associated with the
Gothic genre, we relied on encyclopedias of Gothic literature and
scholarly sources to select 33 texts from our corpus that are recognized
as strongly indicative of the Gothic genre (See Appendix A). We
hypothesized that it would be fruitful to explore the possibility of a
correlation between the continuities observed by scholars in their
categorization of these works and the patterns in characterization that
we extracted.

In addition to examining the Gothic genre, we explored the thirty-six
19th century novels that were examined in "Quantitative Formalism"[^19]
and used in previous experiments to test the ability of computational
tools to sort texts based on genre.  The corpus from Allison et. al.
included novels from the following genres: Gothic (6), historical tale
(4), national tale (4), industrial (6), silver-fork (4), Bildungsroman
(6), Evangelical (2), Newgate (2), and anti-Jacobin (2).  Like our set
of 33 Gothic novels, these novels were selected because they are highly
indicative of their associated genres.  While some of these genres may
reflect contemporary, or specifically scholarly conceptions of genre,
examining these works allowed us to ask useful questions about the
relationships among gender, action, and genre.  For example, while
authors whose works appear in our selection of industrial novels may not
have conceived of their works as specifically "industrial," these
categorizations still reflect a scholarly understanding of continuities
that exist among these texts.  We hypothesized that it would be fruitful
to explore if there were a correlation between the continuities observed
by scholars in their categorization of these works and the patterns in
characterization that we extracted.

 

**Methodology** {#methodology style="text-align: center;"}
---------------

For this study we defined two classes of pronouns: the male pronouns
were "he" and "him," and the female pronouns were "she" and "her."
 Along with these pronouns, we also included the gendered nouns "man",
"woman", "men" and "women." Though not strictly pronouns, the later
nouns are clearly gendered and were included in order to expand the
number of potential male and female characters being tracked. In what
follows, therefore, we use the term "pronoun" loosely in that we include
these later nouns along with pronouns such as "he" and "she."

To grammatically parse the sentences in our corpus of novels and thereby
identify pronoun verb pairings, we relied on the Stanford dependency
parser that is included in the open source Stanford CoreNLP toolkit.
[^20] The dependency parser identifies which words in a sentence are the
subject or object of a verb. Consider the following sentence:

> "She watched as her dog ate the rabbit."

The Stanford tool parses the example sentence and correctly identifies
that the verb "watched" is connected to the pronoun "She":

> nsubj(watched-2, She-1)\
> root(ROOT-0, watched-2)\
> mark(ate-6, as-3)\
> nmod:poss(dog-5, her-4)\
> nsubj(ate-6, dog-5)\
> advcl(watched-2, ate-6)\
> det(rabbit-8, the-7)\
> dobj(ate-6, rabbit-8)

Below is another example showing how the parser identifies verbs in the
gerund form and pairs them with the subject.  Here the parser correctly
identifies that the verb "listened" is associated with the female
pronoun "she" but also that the gerund "talking" is associated with the
pronoun "him."

> "She listened to him talking."
>
> nsubj(listened-2, She-1)\
> root(ROOT-0, listened-2)\
> mark(talking-5, to-3)\
> nsubj(talking-5, him-4)\
> advcl(listened-2, talking-5)

Dependency parsing every single sentence in the 3,329 novels in our
corpus was computationally expensive. Indeed, in similar work, Bamman,
Underwood, and Smith (2014) specifically avoided dependency parsing
their corpus of 15,000 texts because the approach was "too slow for the
scale of \[their\] data." [^21] For this reason, we leveraged the
resources of the Holland Compute cluster at the University of Nebraska,
where the entire parsing task was completed in less than 24 hours.[^22]

Once the dependency parsing was complete, we post-processed the output
using basic regular expression scripting to identify and extract the
*nsubj* / *verb* pairings that met our pronoun class criteria.  In the
first example sentence above, the pronoun "she" is identified as the
subject of the sentence along with its corresponding verb "watched."
Together, these two words form the *nsubj* grouping.

The output of our post processing script was a series of CSV files, one
for each input novel.  Each CSV file contained four columns indicating
the unique text from which the data was extracted ("file\_id"), the
identified verb ("verb"), the raw count of how many times the verb was
associated with a male pronoun ("male\_count"), and the raw count of how
many times the verb was associated with a female pronoun
("female\_count").  An example of the output for the verbs "admired" and
"ran" in Grace Aguilar's 1847 novel *Home influence: a Tale for Mothers
and Daughters* is shown in Table 1:

  file\_id   verb      male\_count   female\_count
  ---------- --------- ------------- ---------------
  2          admired   1             2
  2          ran       3             5

Table 1.

In this case there was one instance of a male pronoun paired with the
verb "admired" and two instances of a female pronoun paired with the
verb "admired."  There were three occurrences of a male pronoun paired
with the verb "ran" and five instances of a female pronoun paired with
"ran."[^23]

The data from all of the CSV files was combined into a single long form
matrix of dimension 4,314,192 x 4.  This long form matrix was reshaped
into a wide form matrix of 6,658 rows by 124,190 columns.  For each row,
an *ID* column indicated the source novel, a *class* column indicated
the pronoun gender, and a column for each of 124,190 *verbs* associated
with the novel and pronoun gender metadata recorded in the previous
columns.  There are, therefore, two rows for each novel: one row
contains the data relating to female pronouns and the other contains the
male pronoun data.[^24] The cells in the matrix contain the raw counts
of each verb in each novel according to associated pronoun class row.

 

### **Pronoun Gender Normalization** {#pronoun-gender-normalization style="text-align: center;"}

In our corpus, male pronouns occur 1.6 times more often than female
pronouns.  Figure 1 offers a chronological representation of this
difference over the course of time represented in our corpus.  To deal
with this imbalance, it was important to convert all of the raw counts
into percentages so that we could understand and compare differences in
usage based on pronoun gender unbiased by the fact that there are many
more male pronoun pairings overall.  To achieve this end, we divided the
raw counts of each verb in each novel by the sum of all of the raw
counts in each novel so as to create a percentage usage of each verb for
each pronoun gender. Consider the case of the verb "said" in William
Ainsworth's *Merry England Or Nobles And Serfs. * In this text, the verb
"said" is associated with a male pronoun 57 times and with a female
pronoun 24 times. However, in this text, there are 1319 male
pronoun-verb pairings and only 539 female pronoun-verb pairings. If we
simply analyzed the raw counts of the verb "said," it might appear that
"said" is far more likely to be associated with male pronouns.  After we
converted the raw values to percentages, however, we found that
association of the verb "said" with female pronouns is actually slightly
higher as a percentage of all female pronoun verb pairs (4.5% of female
pronoun-verb pairings) than it is for males (4.3% of male pronoun-verb
pairings).  By converting all of the raw counts to frequencies that are
relative to the total number of either male or female pronouns in each
text, we compensate for the imbalance between occurrences of male and
female pronouns.

 

::: {#attachment_639 .image style="max-width: 650px"}
![](http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/jockers_fig1.png)

Figure 1. Mean Male and Female Pronoun Occurrence.
:::

###  {#section style="text-align: center;"}

### **Winnowing** {#winnowing style="text-align: center;"}

The dependency parser was not 100% accurate in its identification of
verbs.  Human analysis of the parsed data revealed that many words
identified as verbs were not in fact verbs. The errors were of two
primary types.  In the first case, the parser was simply wrong.  These
mistakes often involved classifying an adjective as a verb.  In the
second case, the parser identified as a verb a character string that was
the result of there being some files in our corpus composed of
uncorrected OCR.  In these later cases, the parser sometimes identified
a "non-word" string of characters that was functioning in the sentence
as a verb, but was not spelled correctly.  Since these errors were not
systematic across the entire corpus, and because they tended to be
infrequent compared to verbs that were correctly identified, we opted to
winnow our data to include only those verbs that occurred with a very
high frequency across the corpus.  This winnowing also gave us the added
advantage of limiting our analysis to those verbs that readers are most
likely to encounter and that tend to be used in association with either
pronoun gender, albeit at different rates of frequency. [^25]

Our feature winnowing strategy involved first calculating the mean
frequency of each verb across the entire corpus.  We then retained only
those verbs in the top 0.0025 (1/400).  This resulted in a subset of 310
highly frequent verbs. While a study of less frequent verbs is also
potentially interesting, we believe that a focus on high-frequency verbs
is of particular value in terms of helping us to understand the
verb-pronoun patterns that are most consistent and most "established" in
the conscious or unconscious minds of the authors who wrote these books.

Even after winnowing in the manner described above, human analysis of
the resulting verbs revealed thirty-nine that were either not verbs or
were ambiguous enough to warrant exclusion.   These thirty-nine tokens
(Appendix B) were added to a blacklist and removed from the analysis. 
The final list of 281 verbs is found in Appendix C.

The normalized and winnowed data was merged with eight columns of book
level metadata to create a final matrix of 6,658 x 289.[^26] The
metadata we catalogued included the book's file name and unique ID, the
author's first and last names, the author's biological gender (where
known), the book's title, year of publication, and the pronoun class
(M/F) corresponding to the verb data in the 281 columns. [^27]

 

**Experiments and Observations** {#experiments-and-observations style="text-align: center;"}
--------------------------------

Once the data were pre-processed in the manner described, we ran a
series of classification experiments using the nearest shrunken
centroids classifier.[^28] The NSC classifier has the advantage of being
a highly interpretable classifier; it not only returns class predictions
and the probabilities associated with those predictions, but it performs
feature selection and provides statistical data about which features
were found to be most useful in the overall classification and which
classes those features are most or least associated with.[^29] Since our
objective was not ultimately to predict likely pronoun genders from a
set of verbs, but rather to understand the types of agency associated
with male and female characters in the 19th-century novel, NSC was an
effective model to deploy since it would distinguish between which verbs
showed little value in separating the two gender classes and which verbs
showed a strong association with one class or the other.

We ran a series of classification experiments on our data in order to
evaluate the strength of the verb to pronoun association and to explore
whether there were external factors such as author gender or novel genre
that influenced the classifier's ability to predict the gender of a
pronoun based on the verbs with which it is most often associated.

 

### **Classification** {#classification style="text-align: center;"}

We began with a straightforward 10-fold cross validation experiment
using a randomly selected two-thirds of the data. [^30] In this
experiment the classifier reported an overall accuracy of 81%.  When the
true pronoun class was female, the machine reported a 22% error rate in
precision and when the true pronoun class was male, a precision error
rate of 16%. The rate of error observed in cross-validation of the
training data was closely reflected in the prediction accuracy observed
when the model was tested on 658 randomly selected rows that were held
out prior to training. In the test involving held out, unseen, data, 18%
of male pronouns were mistakenly classified as female and 23% of female
pronouns were misclassified as male, an overall error rate of 21%.[^31]

This 30% improvement over chance suggested that there was indeed a
strong association of certain verbs with pronoun gender.  In one round
of random sampling, the classifier identified that the verbs "wept,"
"sat," and "felt" were strongly associated with female pronouns and the
verbs "took," "walked," and "rode" were strongly associated with male
pronouns.  The distribution of these verbs appeared to support existing
scholarship on 19th century gender stereotypes; many of the verbs
indicating a female pronoun are associated with emotion while many of
the verbs indicating a male pronoun are associated with physical action
and motion.

After conducting a series of 10-fold cross validations in the manner
described above, we also conducted a large-scale, hold-one-out
validation in which each text was successively held out, while a new
model was trained on all of the remaining data and then used to predict
the class of the held out data.  Ten verbs (five male and five female)
the machine found most useful in differentiating between male and female
pronouns[---]{.emdash}averaged across all of the 3,329 hold one out
cross-validation test[---]{.emdash}are listed in Table 2. The rows are
ranked from one to ten based on how useful they were to the model.  The
third column of the table indicates the gender of the pronoun most
typically associated with the verb shown in the second column.

  Rank   Verb     Pronoun Association
  ------ -------- ---------------------
  1      took     M
  2      wept     F
  3      sat      F
  4      looked   F
  5      felt     F
  6      cried    F
  7      found    M
  8      rode     M
  9      walked   M
  10     come     M

Table 2.

In the hold one out experiment, the machine correctly classified pronoun
gender 5,389 out of 6,658 times for an overall accuracy of 81%.  In
terms of accuracy, this result was identical to the result observed in
the single 10-fold, randomly sampled cross validation experiments.  In
the hold one out tests, when the machine guessed the class incorrectly,
1,269 times, it was almost twice as likely to guess wrong when the true
class was female.  738 of the 1,269 incorrect classifications were for
female pronouns whereas there were only 531 male pronouns that were
misclassified as being female.  This result may indicate that there is
less variation when it comes to verbs associated with male characters,
and it suggests that the verbs most indicative of female pronouns may be
less stable, or more variable, than those associated with male
pronouns.  One might go so far as to say that female pronouns are
slightly less gendered or perhaps less "codified" whereas the male
pronouns seems to occupy a circumscribed behavioral space.  What we
observe, therefore, is a situation in which a verb typically associated
with a female pronoun, such as "acknowledge," is still used in
association with some male pronouns, while a verb typically associated
with male pronouns, such as "rode," is three times less likely to be
used in conjunction with a female pronoun.

In addition to examining the accuracy of the class predictions, NSC
provides class probabilities that can be examined to assess the level of
confidence the classifier has in its class predictions.  An analysis of
the probabilities revealed that when the machine guessed the class
correctly, on average it was 76% confident when the true pronoun was
male and 80% when the true pronoun was female. When the machine guessed
incorrectly, it was less confident (33% mean probability) when assigning
female as the class than when assigning male (37% mean probability). 
These average probabilities indicate that the machine is less confident
in its assertions about verbs associated with female pronouns.  By
extension, this suggests that the verbs associated with female pronouns
are generally more ambiguous in terms of projecting a clear pronoun
gender class.

The classification results indicated that for the corpus as a whole
there were strong associations between verbs and pronoun gender.  Our
next task was to segment the corpus according to genre and determine
whether or not the overall prediction accuracies were sustained.  The
model achieved 58% accuracy predicting the pronoun gender in our six
Bildungsroman novels, 63% accuracy in four silver-fork novels, and 67%
accuracy in three historical novels. Accuracy of 75% was observed for
our two anti-Jacobin, four Evangelical, and eight national tale novels. 
Across thirty-three Gothic novels, we observed 80% accuracy and 100%
accuracy for our six industrial and two Newgate novels (see figure 2).

::: {#attachment_640 .image style="max-width: 650px"}
![](http://culturalanalytics.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/jockers_fig2.png)

Figure 2.
:::

The small number of novels examined means that these accuracy figures
are far from significant. However, it is interesting to consider the
possible ways in which Newgate and industrial novels may be more
strictly codifying gender than what was seen in the Bildungsroman and
historical novel. The evidence, albeit scant, suggests that the male and
female characters found in Newgate and Industrial novels tend to be more
consistently "cast" and distinctly different from each other in terms of
the types of agency they are assigned, whereas in the other two genres
more blending of agency is observed (i.e. male and female characters
were assigned more flexibility in terms of crossing gender agency
norms).  Such an interpretation does make some sense when we consider
that the criminals in Newgate novels have fairly limited and restricted
agency.  Something similar might be said of workers in the industrial
novel.  Whereas a Bildungsroman or historical novel may present
characters at different stages of life and, therefore, characters whose
agency changes/evolves over time and is not static.

While our lack of extensive genre metadata meant that we could not form
robust conclusions about the relationship between character agency and
genre, we did have complete metadata pertaining to author gender, so it
was natural to explore whether there was a detectable relationship
between classification accuracy and author gender. Author gender was not
found to be a strong determiner of classification accuracy.  In our
metadata, we have three classes of author gender: male, female, and
unknown.  The results observed within each of these classes mirrored
what we observed across the entire corpus.  Table 3 provides a summary
of the data when broken down by author gender.

  Author Gender   Incorrect Predictions   Correct Predictions
  --------------- ----------------------- ---------------------
  F               555 (20%)               2153 (80%)
  M               624 (18%)               2868 (82%)
  U               90 (20%)                368 (80%)

Table 3.

In the face of this result, we speculated that perhaps there might be a
relationship between author gender and one particular pronoun gender or
the other.  To explore this, we computed the extent to which the machine
guessed correctly when the author was male and the pronoun was male vs.
when the pronoun was female.  We did the same for female authors.  The
results are reported in Table 4.

  Author Gender   Pronoun Class   Incorrect Predictions   Correct Predictions
  --------------- --------------- ----------------------- ---------------------
  F               F               258 (19%)               1096 (81%)
  F               M               297 (22%)               1057 (78%)
  M               F               420 (24%)               1326 (76%)
  M               M               204 (12%)               1542 (88%)
  U               F               60 (26%)                169 (74%)
  U               M               30 (13%)                199 (87%)

Table 4.

The classification data reported in Table 4 suggest that the machine has
a more difficult time classifying male characters when the author is
female and female characters when the author is male. In addition,
female authors were likely to create male characters who acted outside
of the overall trends we have observed for the corpus as a whole.
Similarly, male authors were more likely to create female characters
that defy the trends observed throughout. This may suggest that male and
female authors were more conventional when creating characters of their
own gender. However, our results also suggest that this trend is more
indicative of male authors than female authors. The classification error
rate for male characters created by male authors is only 12%, indicating
that male authors created male characters that behaved in accordance
with the overall trends far more consistently than when writing female
characters.

We initially expected to discover the opposite of this result; we had
hypothesized that female authors would be more likely to create female
characters that challenged gender stereotypes by acting in a more
"masculine" fashion.  What we observed, however, indicates that the
female authors are associating male pronouns with verbs in a way that is
not quite in line with the overall use of "male-oriented" verbs in the
larger corpus.  Additionally, the machine has a more difficult time
classifying the male usage of female pronouns which suggests that the
male authors are diverging from the large scale patterns of female
pronoun to verb usage.[^32] Finally, when the author gender is unknown,
we observe that the machine struggles a bit more with predictions of
female pronouns.

Next we explored the data in order to identify outlier books.  There
were nine books in which the model guessed wrong for both pronoun
classes: These were as follows: Matthew Lewis's *Romantic Tales,* Thomas
de Quincey's *Klosterheim Or The Masque,* Charlotte Brontë's *Jane
Eyre,* Amelia Edwards's *Miss Carew,* Douglas Jerrold's *Men Of
Character,* Julie Chetwynd's *A Brilliant Woman,* Wilkie Collins's *The
Law And The Lady*, Allan Cunningham's *Sir Michael Scott A Romance*, and
Charles Maturin's *Melmoth The Wanderer A Tale*.  We elected to explore
Maturin's *Melmoth the Wanderer* and Collins's *The Law And The Lady* at
a slightly closer scale because *Melmoth* was the worst scoring novel
with a central male protagonist and *The Law And The Lady* was the worst
for a novel with a central female protagonist.  In Maturin's novel, a
large number of verbs that our model identified as being more typically
associated with female pronouns, including verbs such as *cried,
exclaimed, felt, heard, listened, looked, loved, trembled, wept*, and
*whispered*, are disproportionately associated with male pronouns.[^33]
Here are a few examples in context:

-   "Love," he *cried*, extending his arm towards the dim and troubled
    sky. . .
-   He *exclaimed*, \"What is the matter? You have alarmed me by your
    cries,[---]{.emdash}you pronounced the name of the infernal
    spirit,[---]{.emdash}what have you seen? what is it you fear?\"
-   However it was, he *felt* himself compelled to tell her it was a new
    religion, the religion of Christ, whose rites and worshippers she
    beheld.
-   [---]{.emdash}while he *heard* accents issue from those lips which
    he *felt* it would be as impossible to pervert as it would be to
    teach the nightingale blasphemy,[---]{.emdash}he *sunk* down beside
    her, passed his hand over his livid brow, and, wiping off some cold
    drops, thought for a moment he was not the Cain of the moral world,
    and that the brand was effaced,[---]{.emdash}at least for a moment.
-   Melmoth *felt* as if he *listened* to some herald of "fate and
    fear."
-   He *looked* at her as she fluttered round him with outspread arms
    and dancing eyes; and *sighed*, while she welcomed him in tones of
    such wild sweetness, as suited a being who had hitherto conversed
    with nothing but the melody of birds and the murmur of waters.
-   while he, without uttering a word, leaned against the pillars of her
    balcony, or the trunk of the giant myrtle-tree, which cast the shade
    he *loved*, even by night, over his portentous expression
-   At these words he *trembled*.
-   He sat down and *wept*.
-   He *whispered* in the softest tones.

Also in *Melmoth the Wanderer*, a number of typically male-oriented
verbs were often associated with female pronouns.  These included:

-   She *entered* the room where they were, and they turned towards her
    with their usual smiling demand for her approbation.
-   When she *arrived* at a certain distance from the Castle, she
    dismissed the family carriage, and said she would go on foot with
    her female servant to the farmhouse where horses were awaiting her.
-   Again she *bowed* in the deep prostration which indicates the united
    submission of soul and body, and remained in this attitude of
    absorption so long, that, when she rose, she did not perceive the
    absence of her companion.
-   She *came*, and, on her introduction to Melmoth, it was curious to
    observe the mingled look of servility and command, the result of the
    habits of her life, which was alternately one of abject mendicity,
    and of arrogant but clever imposture.
-   It was remembered, or reported, that she had *made* many efforts to
    soften the heart and open the hand of her brother
-   "I will go back to Germany," she repeated; and, rising, she actually
    *took* three or four firm and equal steps on the floor, while no one
    attempted to approach her.

Similar deviations from the norm were observed in *The Law and the
Lady*.  Verbs more typically associated with female pronouns included,
among many others:

-   "Hang me, innocent as I am!" he *cried*.
-   His expression suddenly changed; his face darkened and hardened very
    strangely. "Stop!" he *cried*, before I could answer him.
-   He *answered* without looking at her; his changeless eyes still
    fixed, as it seemed, on something far away.
-   He *burst* into tears.
-   He had driven the woman whom he *loved* to the last dreadful refuge
    of death by suicide!

Verbs that were more indicative of male pronouns were frequently
associated with female pronouns, as in the following:

-   With perfect tact and kindness she *entered* into conversation with
    me.
-   Ascending another step on the social ladder, she *took* her stand on
    the platform of patronage, and charitably looked down on me as an
    object of pity.
-   When she *ordered* her husband and witness to leave the room, on the
    day of her death.
-   She *left* the carriage in the road; and got into the house by way
    of the garden [---]{.emdash} without being discovered, this time, by
    Dexter, or by anybody.
-   She is away at some wonderful baths in Hungary, or Bohemia (I don't
    remember which) [---]{.emdash} and where she will go, or what she
    will *do*, next, it Is perfectly impossible to say.

We also queried the data to identify books that most defied the corpus
norms: which books according to these macroscale patterns of verb usage
had the most "masculine" female characters and which had the most
"feminine" male characters.  Henry Hebert's novel *The Warwick Woodlands
Or Things As They Were There Ten Years Ago* was identified as the
male-authored novel with the most masculine behaving female characters. 
George Lippard's novel, *Adrian The Neophyte* was identified as having
the most feminine behaving male characters.  Mary Young's *Right And
Wrong Or The Kinsmen Of Naples A Romantic Story* showed female pronouns
with associations to verbs strongly indicative of the male pronoun
class. Dinah Craik's *Romantic Tales* was identified as having male
pronouns that were strongly associated with verbs more typical of the
female pronoun class.

Two, more familiar, novels that exhibited similar behavior were *The
Picture of Dorian Grey* by Oscar Wilde and *Jane Eyre* by Charlotte
Brontë. The male pronouns in *The Picture of Dorian Grey* are frequently
misclassified as being female and the female pronouns in *Jane Eyre* are
often misclassified as male.  When we examine the specific instances, we
see, for example, that male actors in *Dorian Grey* are frequently
paired with the verb "cried" (18 instances compared to 11 with female
pronouns), and "felt" (15 male instances compared with four female
invocations), as well as a number of other verbs typically associated
with female pronouns: *answered, exclaimed, heard, looked, murmured*,
and *sat*. The opposite is seen in *Jane Eyre* where female actors are
very often seen *calling*, *leaving*, *proceeding*, and *taking*, all
activities more typically associated with male pronouns in our corpus.

 

**Conclusions** {#conclusions style="text-align: center;"}
---------------

By the measures employed in this research, we have learned that there is
a strong correlation between character gender and verbs in the 19^th^
century novel.  This finding indicates that representations of behavior,
or agency, understood in terms of the kinds of actions that are
associated with particular pronouns, are an important element of
characterization.  While other elements of character identity, such as
speech patterns and visual appearance, are also important aspects of
characterization, our study indicates that what characters are *doing*
is a key component of how we understand them.  The limited nature of our
metadata pertaining to genre, meant that we could not determine if genre
is or is not a strong determining factor in the relationship between
pronouns and verbs.  However, we did observe some anecdotal correlations
in a few specific genres that seem to make sense when considered in
terms of the kind of character agency we might reasonably expect for
these particular genres.  Because of the difficulties associated with
building a large and robust sample of novels from different genres, it
is also possible that our results would change given a larger sample
set.

Since our study observed a strong correlation between pronoun gender and
verbs, we can conclude that there is evidence for an overarching trend
of ascribing certain actions to certain genders in the 19^th^ century
novel.  Further, it would appear as if this trend corresponds with
general notions of gender propriety; we observed that verbs connoting
emotion and sentiment (such as to cry, to love, to weep, etc.) were more
strongly associated with female characters while verbs connoting action
and motion were more strongly associated with male characters (to
advance, to approach, to ride, etc.)  This result would seem to support
the work of literary and cultural critics who have observed the 19^th^
century tendency to valorize passive women and active men. [^34]
Nevertheless, "passive" is clearly not the best descriptor for many
verbs associated with female pronouns.  While verbs such as "smiled" and
"loved" do not denote aggressive physical action, a good argument can be
made that they are not describing passive actions either.[^35]

In addition, it is important to note that not every pronoun/verb pair
that corresponds with the trends we observed is an example of a gendered
stereotype.  There are three key factors of gendered characterization
that our study did not take into account, the first of which is irony. 
The sincere presentation of a female heroine who is emotional, domestic,
and passive is quite different from the intentional parody of such a
stereotype.  However, in either case, the female character may be
associated with the same actions.  Jane Austen offers a compelling and
easily recognizable example of this phenomenon.  In our study, the
relationship between gendered pronouns and verbs in *Pride and
Prejudice, Mansfield Park, Emma, Sense and Sensibility, Northanger
Abbey,* and *Persuasion* corresponded with the overall trends we
observed in our entire corpus.  This is not to say, however, that these
books necessarily subscribe to conventional notions of gender since, as
recent critics have argued, Austen's subversive potential lies under a
shallow veneer of convention.  As Marvin Mudrick observes in *Jane
Austen: Irony as Defense and Discovery,* Austen used irony to "expose
the incongruities between form and fact, all the delusions intrinsic to
conventional art and conventional society" [^36]. Thus within the scope
of our study, novels in which the author is intentionally pushing
against, playing with, or directly critiquing gendered stereotypes may
be computationally indistinguishable from works that are perpetuating
the same stereotypes.

The second way in which our model may overlook certain aspects of
gendered characterization is by not accounting for all forms of
character presence.  Our work only examines gendered pronouns and not,
for example, first person pronouns and proper names.[^37] In addition,
by looking at male and female pronouns, our study groups characters
together, regardless of their status, importance, or emotional valence. 
For example, when we note that female characters are often associated
with emotional verbs, we are speaking of *all* female characters:
princesses, witches, maidens, mothers, queens, beggars, etc.  Similarly,
when we examine a novel in which the characterization of male pronouns
does *not* follow the general trends of our corpus, there is no way for
us to determine whether all of the male characters are behaving in an
unconventional way, or whether it is simply the protagonist, or
antagonist.  These distinctions are ultimately quite important for a
study of characterization and gender, since the implications of creating
a laudable female heroine who behaves in a "masculine" manner are quite
different from the implications of creating a female villain whose
"male" behavior only serves to further demonize her.  This last issue
may also point towards a potential reason why our investigation of
specific genres, including the Gothic novel, did not produce results
that differed greatly from the overall trends in our corpus.  It is
quite possible that *specific* character archetypes, such as the
heroine, do behave differently in certain genres, but that in averaging
character behavior, this information is lost.

A third item that our method did not account for is narrative time.  It
is entirely possible that, in a Bildungsroman for example, a character
matures over the course of the narrative and that the verbs associated
with that character change in accordance with that maturation. Tracking
the presence, or not, of such verbal change seems like an interesting
avenue of future investigation. Of course, not all narratives move from
beginning to end in chronological time, so such investigation is by no
means straightforward.

Further exploring the ages and types of characters that are associated
with specific behaviors would enrich our study of gender and agency and
would allow us to examine other factors that may be at play in creating
stereotypes.  Rather than assume that the relationship between gendered
pronouns and verbs that we have observed is evidence only of gender
stereotypes, we might ask how other factors, such as character age,
race, class, and profession are tied to character behavior.  It is also
worthwhile to note that even within the scope of our current work, the
correlation between gendered pronouns and verbs is likely indicative of
not just gender stereotypes, but also literary stereotypes and
archetypes. Specific character types, such as the Byronic hero or the
damsel in distress are a reflection of multiple markers of identity, not
simply gender.

### Acknowledgments

Both authors contributed equally to this research, and both authors are
thankful for support from the Social Science and Humanities Research
Council (SSHRC) of Canada.  The authors wish to thank the staff of the
Holland Computing Center at the University of Nebraska, especially
Emelie Harstad and also the students of the Nebraska Literary Lab,
especially Roz Thalken, Emma Himes, Natalie Mackley, and Julius
Fredrick. The authors also wish to thank the anonymous reviewer whose
comments lead us to a stronger paper.

**Appendix A:**
---------------

List of Genre Novels

  Last        First       Title                                                                                                                     Genre
  ----------- ----------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------
  Moore       John        Mordaunt Sketches Of Life Characters And Manners In Various Countries Including The Memoirs Of A French Lady Of Quality   Anti-Jacobin
  Opie        Amelia      Adeline Mowbray Or The Mother And Daughter                                                                                Anti-Jacobin
  Bronte      Charlotte   Jane Eyre                                                                                                                 Bildungsroman
  Dickens     Charles     David Copperfield                                                                                                         Bildungsroman
  Dickens     Charles     Great Expectations                                                                                                        Bildungsroman
  Evans       Marian      Daniel Deronda                                                                                                            Bildungsroman
  Evans       Marian      Middlemarch A Study Of Provincial Life                                                                                    Bildungsroman
  Thackeray   William     The History Of Pendennis His Fortunes And Misfortunes His Friends And His Greatest Enemy                                  Bildungsroman
  Brunton     Mary        Selfcontrol A Novel Second Edition                                                                                        Evangelical
  More        Hannah      Coelebs In Search Of A Wife Comprehending Observations On Domestic Habits And Manners Religion And Morals                 Evangelical
  Brown       Charles     Wieland                                                                                                                   Gothic
  Byrne       Charlotte   Zofloya Or The Moor A Romance Of The Fifteenth Century                                                                    Gothic
  Collins     Wilkie      The Woman In White                                                                                                        Gothic
  Dickens     Charles     The Mystery Of Edwin Drood                                                                                                Gothic
  Golland     C D         The Ruins Of Ruthvale Abbey A Novel                                                                                       Gothic
  Hogg        James       The Private Memoirs And Confessions Of A Justified Sinner                                                                 Gothic
  Le Fanu     Joseph      Carmilla                                                                                                                  Gothic
  Le Fanu     Joseph      In A Glass Darkly                                                                                                         Gothic
  Le Fanu     Joseph      Madam Crowls Ghost And The Dead Sexton                                                                                    Gothic
  Le Fanu     Joseph      The Evil Guest                                                                                                            Gothic
  Le Fanu     Joseph      Uncle Silas                                                                                                               Gothic
  Le Fanu     Joseph      Uncle Silas A Tale Of Bartram Haugh                                                                                       Gothic
  Lewis       Matthew     The Monk A Romance                                                                                                        Gothic
  Maturin     Charles     Melmoth The Wanderer A Tale                                                                                               Gothic
  Mitchell    Isaac       The Asylum Or Alonzo And Melissa An American Tale Foundedon Fact                                                          Gothic
  Moore       George      Grasville Abbey A Romance                                                                                                 Gothic
  Moore       John        Zeluco Various Views Of Human Nature Taken From Life And Manners Foreign And Domestic                                     Gothic
  Peacock     Thomas      Nightmare Abbey                                                                                                           Gothic
  Poe         Edgar       Tales Of The Grotesque And Arabesque                                                                                      Gothic
  Polidori    John        The Vampyre A Tale                                                                                                        Gothic
  Quintin     Poynet      The Wizard Priest And The Witch                                                                                           Gothic
  Radcliffe   Ann         A Sicilian Romance                                                                                                        Gothic
  Radcliffe   Ann         The Italian Or The Confessional Of The Black Penitents A Romance                                                          Gothic
  Radcliffe   Ann         The Mysteries Of Udolpho A Romance Interspersed With Some Pieces Of Poetry                                                Gothic
  Radcliffe   Ann         The Romance Of The Forest Interspersed With Some Pieces Of Poetry                                                         Gothic
  Reeve       Clara       The Old English Baron                                                                                                     Gothic
  Shelley     Mary        Frankenstein Or The Modern Prometheus                                                                                     Gothic
  Shelley     Percy       Zastrozzi A Romance                                                                                                       Gothic
  Smith       Charlotte   The Old Manor House A Novel                                                                                               Gothic
  Stevenson   Robert      Strange Case Of Dr Jekyll And Mr Hyde                                                                                     Gothic
  Stoker      Abraham     Dracula                                                                                                                   Gothic
  Thomas      Henry       The Irish Necromancer                                                                                                     Gothic
  Wilde       Oscar       The Picture Of Dorian Gray                                                                                                Gothic
  Galt        John        The Entail Or The Lairds Of Grippy                                                                                        Historical
  Scott       Walter      Waverley                                                                                                                  Historical
  Scott       Walter      Ivanhoe A Romance In The Waverley Novels                                                                                  Historical
  Shelley     Mary        Valperga Or The Life And Adventures Of Castruccio Prince Of Lucca                                                         Historical
  Bronte      Charlotte   Shirley A Tale                                                                                                            Industrial
  Dickens     Charles     Hard Times For These Times                                                                                                Industrial
  Gaskell     Elizabeth   Mary Barton A Tale Of Manchester Life                                                                                     Industrial
  Gaskell     Elizabeth   North And South                                                                                                           Industrial
  Kingsley    Charles     Alton Locke Tailor And Poet An Autobiography                                                                              Industrial
  Trollope    Frances     The Life And Adventures Of Michael Armstrong The Factory Boy                                                              Industrial
  Edgeworth   Maria       Castle Rackrent An Hibernian Tale Taken From Facts And From The Manners Of The Irish Squires Before The Year 1782         National Tale
  Edgeworth   Maria       The Absentee In Tales Of Fashionable Life                                                                                 National Tale
  Ferrier     Susan       Marriage A Novel                                                                                                          National Tale
  Morgan      Sydney      The Wild Irish Girl A National Tale                                                                                       National Tale
  Ainsworth   William     Jack Sheppard A Romance                                                                                                   Newgate
  Lytton      Edward      Eugene Aram A Tale                                                                                                        Newgate
  Disraeli    Benjamin    Vivian Grey A New Edition                                                                                                 Silver-Fork
  Gore        Catherine   Mrs Armytage Or Female Domination                                                                                         Silver-Fork
  Lamb        Caroline    Glenarvon                                                                                                                 Silver-Fork
  Lytton      Edward      Pelham Or The Adventures Of A Gentleman                                                                                   Silver-Fork

**Appendix B:**
---------------

Blacklist of words: able, about, afraid, alone, aware, beautiful,
better, child, con, creature, daughter, dead, done, fellow, friend,
girl, glad, good, guilty, happy, herself, ill, kind, lady, man, more,
much, one, pale, person, re, right, silent, w, wife, woman, X..19, X.s,
young

 

**Appendix C:**
---------------

accept, added, addressed, advanced, allowed, answer, answered, anxious,
appear, appeared, approached, arrived, ask, asked, be, bear, became,
become, been, began, beheld, believe, believed, bent, bore, bowed,
bring, broke, brought, burst, call, called, came, care, cared, carried,
cast, caught, ceased, chose, closed, come, comes, coming, concluded,
considered, continued, could, cried, dared, declared, desired,
determined, did, die, died, discovered, do, does, doing, drew, dropped,
endeavoured, enter, entered, exclaimed, expected, expressed, face,
fallen, fancied, feared, feel, fell, felt, find, finished, follow,
followed, forget, forgot, forgotten, found, free, gained, gave, gazed,
get, give, given, glanced, go, goes, going, gone, got, grew, had, has,
hath, have, hear, heard, held, help, hesitated, hold, hoped, hurried,
imagined, inquired, intended, is, keep, kept, kissed, knew, know, known,
knows, laid, laughed, lay, leaned, learned, leave, led, left, let,
lifted, like, liked, likes, listen, listened, live, lived, lives, look,
looked, looking, looks, lost, love, loved, loves, made, make, makes,
married, marry, meant, meet, met, moved, murmured, muttered, observed,
offered, opened, ought, paid, pass, passed, paused, pay, perceived,
placed, played, pleased, pointed, possessed, pressed, proceeded,
promised, put, quitted, raised, ran, reached, read, ready, receive,
received, recovered, refused, regarded, remain, remained, remembered,
repeated, replied, resolved, resumed, retired, return, returned, rode,
rose, run, rushed, said, sank, sat, saw, say, says, see, seem, seemed,
seems, seen, sees, seized, send, sent, set, shook, show, showed, sighed,
sit, sitting, smiled, sought, speak, spent, spoke, spoken, sprang,
stand, started, stay, stood, stopped, succeeded, suffered, supposed,
sure, take, taken, takes, talk, talked, tell, think, thinking, thinks,
thought, threw, told, took, tried, try, turn, turned, understand,
understood, used, uttered, wait, waited, walk, walked, want, wanted,
wants, was, watched, went, wept, were, whispered, will, wish, wished,
wore, would, write, written, wrote

 

**Appendix D:**
---------------

List of top 50 verbs typically observed with male and female pronouns
(in order of relevance from most relevant to least).

Male: took, found, rode, walked, come, muttered, left, paid, made, get,
called, came, do, take, got, find, comes, arrived, call, bowed, taken,
intended, set, proceeded, make, offered, meant, led, seized, entered,
pay, reached, returned, return, addressed, going, brought, knows, went,
give, wrote, succeeded, goes, says, sent, thinks, gained, wants,
followed, talked.

Female: sat, wept, looked, felt, heard, cried, loved, knew, burst,
answered, rose, love, murmured, listened, sank, ran, exclaimed, smiled,
replied, whispered, accept, face, refused, sighed, hear, sitting, was,
feared, moved, marry, recovered, bear, kissed, suffered, listen, read,
loves, look, threw, lay, sit, uttered, remain, know, feel, tried,
receive, understand, said, looks.

 

 

[^1]: Vladimir Propp, *Morphology of the Folktale: Second
    Edition* (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1968), 87.

[^2]: E.g. Joseph Campbell, *The Hero with a Thousand Faces *(Princeton,
    N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1972); C. G Jung and R. F. C.
    Hull, *The Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious* (Princeton,
    N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1980).

[^3]: Bamman et. al. analyze character personas in a large corpus of
    plot summaries using metadata obtained from a database (Freebase) of
    film characters and the actors who played them. David Bamman,
    Brendan O'Connor and Noah A. Smith, "Learning Latent Personas of
    Film Characters," In *Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the
    Association for Computational Linguistics* 1: Long Papers (ACL:
    2013), 352.

[^4]: i.e. Authors may also employ dialog and description to articulate
    character traits.

[^5]: David Bamman, Ted Underwood and Noah A. Smith, "A Bayesian Mixed
    Effects Model of Literary Character," In *Proceedings of the 52nd
    Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics* 1:
    Long Papers (ACL: 2014), 377.

[^6]: Bamman et. al., "A Bayesian Mixed Effects Model of Literary
    Character," 377.

[^7]: Bamman et. al., "A Bayesian Mixed Effects Model of Literary
    Character," 377.

[^8]: A bibliography of the works in our corpus is available online
    at: *[doi:10.7910/DVN/3UXBOJ](http://dx.doi.org/10.7910/DVN/3UXBOJ)*. 
    250 of the British novels were from the Chadwyck Healey
    Nineteenth-Century Fiction collection.  900 of the American works
    were from the Chadwyck-Healey Early American Fiction collections. 
    The rest of the collection was made up of works collected from
    Project Gutenberg, the internet archive, and ad hoc scanning efforts
    of the Stanford Literary Lab between 2008-2011.  The materials from
    the internet archive and the Stanford scans were uncorrected OCR.

[^9]: Barbara Welter, "The Cult of True Womanhood: 1820-1860," *American
    Quarterly* 18, no. 2 (1966): 151-74. Emphasis added.

[^10]: Stefanie Markovits, *The Crisis of Action in Nineteenth-century
    English Literature* (Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 2006),
    103.

[^11]: Stefanie Markovits, *The Crisis of Action in Nineteenth-century
    English Literature*, 103.

[^12]: Sandra M. Gilbert, and Susan Gubar, *The Madwoman in the Attic:
    The Woman Writer and the Nineteenth-century Literary Imagination*
    (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1979).

[^13]: For historical information about the advent of female authors and
    readers, and female writing in general during the 19th century, see:
    Susan S. Williams, *Reclaiming Authorship: Literary Women in
    America, 1850-1900* (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania,
    2006); Joanne Shattock, *Women and Literature in Britain: 1800-1900*
    (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001).

[^14]: Oliver Baylog, Laura Dimmit, Travis Heller, Gabi Kirilloff,
    Shannon Smith, Grace Thomas, Chandler Warren, and James Wehrwein,
    \"'[More than Custom has Pronounced Necessary': Exploring the
    Correlation between Gendered Verbs and Character in the 19th Century
    Novel](http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1006&context=englishtalks),\"
    UNL Digital Commons, accessed January 22, 2016.

[^15]: The problems associated with genre are irrevocably tied to the
    concept's benefits; as a classification scheme, it helps us to talk,
    think, and write about literature, but it can subsequently impose
    artificial and socially constructed boundaries on a text.  As Adena
    Rosmarin notes, the conventional uses of genre theory tend to
    "naturalize or historicize the genre by retrospectively 'finding' it
    in the literary text..." thus imposing an artificial category on a
    more fluid, malleable, and indeterminate textual form (Adena
    Rosmarin, *The Power of Genre* (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
    Press, 1985), 26). In addition, scholars have observed the extent to
    which single works participate in multiple genres, making acts of
    categorization difficult.  Further complicating these issues is the
    question of which textual features contribute to our understanding
    of genre.  As Amy Dewitt observes, genre has been traditionally
    explored in terms of form, rather than content, even though such a
    divide does not take into account the way in which multiple traits
    inform our understanding of genre (Amy J. Devitt, "Generalizing
    about Genre: New Conceptions of an Old Concept," *College
    Composition and Communication* 44.4 (1993): 573). Computational
    analysis offers a useful tool within this conversation precisely
    because it allows scholars to look for commonalities among a large
    corpus of texts.  Such methodologies allow scholars to search for
    patterns across a diverse corpus, and to examine whether or not
    these patterns relate to perceived genre categories.\
    The connection between gender and genre offers rich possibilities
    for research, since it interrogates the ways in which notions of
    social propriety influence writing.  In speaking of the connection
    between gender and genre, Marjorie Stone notes, "the Victorian
    tendency to insist upon the hierarchy of genders may well have
    contributed to the stubborn persistence of the traditional hierarchy
    of genres" (Marjorie Stone, "Genre Subversion and Gender Inversion:
    'The Princess' and 'Aurora Leigh'," *Victorian Poetry* 25, no. 2
    (1987): 102). Tied to this observation is the understanding that
    19^th^ century notions of propriety dictated that certain types of
    writing and certain topics were considered inappropriate for female
    writers.  In addition, scholars have observed the ways in which
    specific genres, such as the Gothic novel, demonstrate particular
    trends in their portrayal of gender.  As Donna Heiland notes, "the
    transgressive acts at the heart of Gothic fiction generally focus on
    corruption in, or resistance to, the patriarchal structures that
    shaped the country's political life and its family life, and gender
    roles within those structures come in for particular scrutiny"
    (Donna Heiland, *Gothic & Gender: An Introduction* (Malden:
    Blackwell, 2004), 5). If certain genres were considered more
    appropriate for male or female authors, and if different types of
    gender characterization are associated with specific genres, we
    might ask if, and how, this manifests itself in the behavior of male
    and female characters.

[^16]: De Sade, *Idee sur les romans* (Paris, 1800), quoted in E.J.
    Clery, *The Rise of Supernatural Fiction* (Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 1999), 156.

[^17]: Jane Austen, *Northanger Abbey* (London: CRW Pub., 2004), 44. For
    more, please see the introductions of Montague Summers, *The Gothic
    Quest; a History of the Gothic Novel* (New York: Russell & Russell,
    1964).

[^18]: For an examination of gender in the Gothic novel, see: C. Wynne's
    *Bram Stoker, Dracula and the Victorian Gothic Stage* (London:
    Palgrave Macmillan, 2013), which claims that "Gothic performance
    opens up a space to challenge sexual and gender norms" (11). The
    fact that the Gothic novel can be viewed as a space in which to
    explore Victorian gender roles does not mean that Gothic writers
    were themselves intentionally challenging these roles. As Jarlath
    Killeen observes in *History of the Gothic: Gothic Literature
    1825-1914* (Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 2009), Gothic
    writers themselves may have been "conservative" even while their
    fiction "forced them into unearthing some of the limitations of the
    gender roles ascribed to women in the Victorian period."

[^19]: Sarah Allison, Ryan Heuser, Matthew L. Jockers, Franco Moretti,
    and Michael Witmore, "Quantitative Formalism: An Experiment," *N+1,*
    no. 13, (Winter 2012), 81-108.

[^20]: Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, and Christopher D.
    Manning. "Generating Typed Dependency Parses from Phrase Structure
    Parses," *5th* *International Conference on Language Resources and
    Evaluation* (2006); Marneffe, Timothy Dozat, Natalia Silveira, Katri
    Haverinen, Filip Ginter, Joakim Nivre, and Christopher D. Manning,
    "Universal Stanford dependencies: A cross-linguistic typology," *9th
    International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation*
    (2014); Danqi Chen and Christopher D. Manning, "A Fast and Accurate
    Dependency Parser using Neural Networks," In *Proceedings of EMNLP*
    (2014). Also see http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml

[^21]: David Bamman, Ted Underwood and Noah A. Smith, "A Bayesian Mixed
    Effects Model of Literary Character," 371

[^22]: Some of the files in our collection contained uncorrected OCR
    which presented an especially challenging situation for the parser. 
    One text, for example, contained an unpunctuated list of 225 words
    that the parser believed to be a very long sentence.  When we first
    ran the parser without setting a maximum sentence length flag, the
    parser repeatedly failed when trying to parse this long list as a
    sentence. Setting the maximum to 50 resolved this and similar
    problems generated by poor OCR.

[^23]: When we speak of "pairs" here we mean the subject of the sentence
    and the verb that the subject is performing.  Thus, in the sentence
    "She admired him" the subject we are extracting is "she" with the
    verb "admired."

[^24]: Obviously, there is nothing special about our decision to store
    the male and female data in the same matrix.  This was done for
    convenience. The data could have been stored in two separate
    matrices, one for male pronouns and one for females.

[^25]: Another type of study might elect to focus on infrequent verbs or
    verbs that are only used in association with one pronoun gender or
    the other.

[^26]: The normalized and winnowed data is included in the file titled
    "percentage\_data.csv"

[^27]: We understand that gender can be fluid.  Authors were coded as
    being either male or female based on biographical research.  Authors
    working under known pseudonyms were coded according to their known
    biological gender and not the implied gender of their pseudonyms.
    For example, works authored by Mary Ann Evans under the pseudonym
    George Elliot were coded as female. In cases where a biological
    gender could not be determined, author genders were marked as
    "unknown."

[^28]: Robert Tibshirani, Trevor Hastie, Balasubramanian Narasimhan, and
    Gilbert Chu, "Diagnosis of multiple cancer types by shrunken
    centroids of gene expression," *PNAS* 99, no. 10 (2002): 6567-6572;
    2003; Tibshirani, Trevor Hastie, Balasubramanian Narasimhan, and
    Gilbert Chu,  "Class Prediction by Nearest Shrunken Centroids, with
    Applications to DNA Microarrays," *Statistical Science* 18, no. 1
    (2003): 104-117; Matthew L. Jockers and Daniela M. Witten, "A
    Comparative Study of Machine Learning Methods for Authorship
    Attribution," *Literary and Linguistic Computing* 25.2 (2010):
    215-224.

[^29]: Appendix D provides a list of the top 100 male and female
    oriented verbs that the machine identified as being important during
    one random run of the classifier.

[^30]: We performed a series of runs using different random selections,
    but for the sake of repeatability, the data reported here were
    obtained using a set random seed of 1966. All of the code for this
    classification is found in the file titled "classification.R"

[^31]: The classes were evenly balanced, so we can assume a baseline
    accuracy of 0.5.

[^32]: One can't help but wonder if these differences are the result of
    authors not fully understanding the gender conventions associated
    with the gender opposite to their own.

[^33]: It is not entirely surprising to find Maturin and Collins
    identified as outliers given how both authors have received
    attention from scholars interested in the portrayal of gender. 
    Scholars have noted, for example, that the depiction of female
    characters in *Melmoth* can be read as challenging societal norms. 
    In \"The Ethics of Excess in *Melmoth the Wanderer*\" Nathaniel
    Leach notes that *Melmoth* depicts female characters in a way that
    differs from traditional romantic narratives.  He argues that the
    character Immalee is depicted as more than a textbook damsel in
    distress.  In \"Experimentation and 'horrid Curiosity' in Maturin's
    *Melmoth the Wanderer*\" Amy Smith also observes that the female
    characters in *Melmoth* are allocated more agency than many of the
    male characters.  In discussing Collins, feminist critics have
    disagreed on Collins's engagement with Victorian gender norms. In
    \"Wilkie Collin's Modern Snow White (Arsenic Consumption and Ghastly
    Complexions in *The Law and the Lady)\"* Laurence Talairach-Vielmas
    states that in \"*The Law and the Lady,* Collins continues his
    critique of woman's commodification..."  However, in "Reading Faces:
    Physiognomy and the Depiction of the Heroine in the Fiction of
    Wilkie Collins\" Jessica Cox concludes that "In spite of the fact
    that sensation fiction has frequently been identified as subversive,
    Collins's novels are in fact littered with depictions of the
    conventional Victorian feminine ideal" (Jessica Cox, "A Brief
    Explication of "Reading Faces: Physiognomy and the Depiction of the
    Heroine in the Fiction of Wilkie Collins,\" In *Wilkie Collins:
    Interdisciplinary Essays,* ed. Andrew Mangham (Newcastle: Cambridge
    Scholars Publishing, 2007), 111).  Collin's overall approach to
    characterization is also important in thinking about the role of
    gender in *The Law and the Lady*.  According to Bradley Booth
    "Collins advised his readers that 'the actions of human beings are
    not invariably governed by the laws of pure reason.'  He also
    cautions us that we must not take our own limited experience as the
    criterion of the possible" (Bradford A. Booth, "Wilkie Collins and
    the Art of Fiction," *Nineteenth Century Fiction* 6.2 (1951):
    140-141).

[^34]: Using verbs to study the relationship between agency and gender
    is not unprecedented; in a 1997 study on the psychological
    perception of agency, Marianne Lafrance, Hiram Brownell and Eugene
    Hahn observe that different types of verbs imply different degrees
    of power.  This study is particularly useful to our enterprise
    because of the way that it is focused on the relationship between
    text and perception.  Hiram, Brownell, and Hahn comment on the
    unique way that grammar and word choice can impact a reader's, or
    listener's, perception of power relations.  The authors note that
    "verb type and gender stereotype combine to affect people's
    perception about who is perceived to bring about interpersonal
    events..." (1).  The authors argue that when action verbs are used,
    such as "to walk" or "to ride," it is assumed that the subject of
    the sentence causes the action.  However, when a verb describing an
    emotional state is used, such as "to love" it is assumed that the
    object of the sentence somehow elicited the emotion.  Thus, the
    subject of an action verb, and the recipient of an emotion verb, are
    both perceived as causal and assumed to have a high degree of
    agency.  Even though this study was conducted recently, when
    combined with notions of Victorian gender stereotypes, Hiram,
    Brownell, and Hahn's study points towards an interesting line of
    reasoning: if the ideal Victorian woman was associated with acts of
    emotion, such as loving, feeling, and worrying, than even though
    19th century female characters may be associated with a large number
    of such verbs, these verbs do not necessarily imply the same degree
    of agency as verbs related to physical action. See Baylog, et. al.,
    "'More than Custom has Pronounced Necessary'," 4-5.

[^35]: In reviewing a draft of this paper, Ted Underwood noted how a
    word such as "cried" embodies this precise ambiguity in that it can
    mean either "weep" or "exclaim" depending upon context.

[^36]: Marvin Mudrick, *Jane Austen: Irony as Defense and
    Discovery* (Berkeley: University of California, 1968), 1.

[^37]: A first person narrative, employing the pronouns "I" and "me"
    could be either male or female and might be associated with a
    different set of verbs than those we identified as being strongly
    associated with male or female pronouns.
